
CHAPTER ONE 

IT WAS INEVITABLE: the scent of bitter almonds always reminded him of the fate of 
unrequited love. Dr. Juvenal Urbino noticed it as soon as he entered the still darkened 
house where he had hurried on an urgent call to attend a case that for him had lost all 
urgency many years before. The Antillean refugee Jeremiah de Saint-Amour, disabled 
war veteran, photographer of children, and his most sympathetic opponent in chess, had 
escaped the torments of memory with the aromatic fumes of gold cyanide. 

He found the corpse covered with a blanket on the campaign cot where he had always 
slept, and beside it was a stool with the developing tray he had used to vaporize the 
poison. On the floor, tied to a leg of the cot, lay the body of a black Great Dane with a 
snow-white chest, and next to him were the crutches. At one window the splendor of 
dawn was just beginning to illuminate the stifling, crowded room that served as both 
bedroom and laboratory, but there was enough light for him to recognize at once the 
authority of death. The other windows, as well as every other chink in the room, were 
muffled with rags or sealed with black cardboard, which increased the oppressive heaviness. 
A counter was crammed with jars and bottles without labels and two crumbling 
pewter trays under an ordinary light bulb covered with red paper. The third tray, the one 
for the fixative solution, was next to the body. There were old magazines and newspapers 
everywhere, piles of negatives on glass plates, broken furniture, but everything was kept 
free of dust by a diligent hand. Although the air coming through the window had purified 
the atmosphere, there still remained for the one who could identify it the dying embers of 
hapless love in the bitter almonds. Dr. Juvenal Urbino had often thought, with no 
premonitory intention, that this would not be a propitious place for dying in a state of 
grace. But in time he came to suppose that perhaps its disorder obeyed an obscure 
determination of Divine Providence. 

A police inspector had come forward with a very young medical student who was 
completing his forensic training at the municipal dispensary, and it was they who had 
ventilated the room and covered the body while waiting for Dr. Urbino to arrive. They 
greeted him with a solemnity that on this occasion had more of condolence than 
veneration, for no one was unaware of the degree of his friendship with Jeremiah de 
Saint-Amour. The eminent teacher shook hands with each of them, as he always did with 
every one of his pupils before beginning the daily class in general clinical medicine, and 
then, as if it were a flower, he grasped the hem of the blanket with the tips of his index 
finger and his thumb, and slowly uncovered the body with sacramental circumspection. 
Jeremiah de Saint-Amour was completely naked, stiff and twisted, eyes open, body blue, 
looking fifty years older than he had the night before. He had luminous pupils, yellowish 
beard and hair, and an old scar sewn with baling knots across his stomach. The use of 
crutches had made his torso and arms as broad as a galley slave’s, but his defenseless legs 
looked like an orphan’s. Dr. Juvenal Urbino studied him for a moment, his heart aching 
as it rarely had in the long years of his futile struggle against death. 

“Damn fool,” he said. “The worst was over.” 


He covered him again with the blanket and regained his academic dignity. His eightieth 
birthday had been celebrated the year before with an official three-day jubilee, and in his 
thank-you speech he had once again resisted the temptation to retire. He had said: “I’ll 
have plenty of time to rest when I die, but this eventuality is not yet part of my plans.” 
Although he heard less and less with his right ear, and leaned on a silver-handled cane to 
conceal his faltering steps, he continued to wear a linen suit, with a gold watch chain 
across his vest, as smartly as he had in his younger years. His Pasteur beard, the color of 
mother-of-pearl, and his hair, the same color, carefully combed back and with a neat part 
in the middle, were faithful expressions of his character. He compensated as much as he 
could for an increasingly disturbing erosion of memory by scribbling hurried notes on 
scraps of paper that ended in confusion in each of his pockets, as did the instruments, the 
bottles of medicine, and all the other things jumbled together in his crowded medical bag. 
He was not only the city’s oldest and most illustrious physician, he was also its most 
fastidious man. Still, his too obvious display of learning and the dis ingenuous manner in 
which he used the power of his name had won him less affection than he deserved. 

His instructions to the inspector and the intern were precise and rapid. There was no 
need for an autopsy; the odor in the house was sufficient proof that the cause of death had 
been the cyanide vapors activated in the tray by some photographic acid, and Jeremiah de 
Saint-Amour knew too much about those matters for it to have been an accident. When 
the inspector showed some hesitation, he cut him off with the kind of remark that was 
typical of his manner: “Don’t forget that I am the one who signs the death certificate.” 
The young doctor was disappointed: he had never had the opportunity to study the effects 
of gold cyanide on a cadaver. Dr. Juvenal Urbino had been surprised that he had not seen 
him at the Medical School, but he understood in an instant from the young man’s easy 
blush and Andean accent that he was probably a recent arrival to the city. He said: “There 
is bound to be someone driven mad by love who will give you the chance one of these 
days.” And only after he said it did he realize that among the countless suicides he could 
remember, this was the first with cyanide that had not been caused by the sufferings of 
love. Then something changed in the tone of his voice. 

“And when you do find one, observe with care,” he said to the intern: “they almost 
always have crystals in their heart.” 

Then he spoke to the inspector as he would have to a subordinate. He ordered him to 
circumvent all the legal procedures so that the burial could take place that same afternoon 
and with the greatest discretion. He said: “I will speak to the Mayor later.” He knew that 
Jeremiah de Saint-Amour lived in primitive austerity and that he earned much more with 
his art than he needed, so that in one of the drawers in the house there was bound to be 
more than enough money for the funeral expenses. 

“But if you do not find it, it does not matter,” he said. “I will take care of everything.” 

He ordered him to tell the press that the photographer had died of natural causes, 
although he thought the news would in no way interest them. He said: “If it is necessary, 
I will speak to the Governor.” The inspector, a serious and humble civil servant, knew 
that the Doctor’s sense of civic duty exasperated even his closest friends, and he was 
surprised at the ease with which he skipped over legal formalities in order to expedite the 
burial. The only thing he was not willing to do was speak to the Archbishop so that 
Jeremiah de Saint-Amour could be buried in holy ground. The inspector, astonished at his 
own impertinence, attempted to make excuses for him. 


“I understood this man was a saint,” he said. 

“Something even rarer,” said Dr. Urbino. “An atheistic saint. But those are matters for 
God to decide.” 

In the distance, on the other side of the colonial city, the bells of the Cathedral were 
ringing for High Mass. Dr. Urbino put on his half-moon glasses with the gold rims and 
consulted the watch on its chain, slim, elegant, with the cover that opened at a touch: he 
was about to miss Pentecost Mass. 

In the parlor was a huge camera on wheels like the ones used in public parks, and the 
backdrop of a marine twilight, painted with homemade paints, and the walls papered with 
pictures of children at memorable moments: the first Communion, the bunny costume, 
the happy birthday. Year after year, during contemplative pauses on afternoons of chess, 
Dr. Urbino had seen the gradual covering over of the walls, and he had often thought with 
a shudder of sorrow that in the gallery of casual portraits lay the germ of the future city, 
governed and corrupted by those unknown children, where not even the ashes of his glory 
would remain. 

On the desk, next to a jar that held several old sea dog’s pipes, was the chessboard with 
an unfinished game. Despite his haste and his somber mood, Dr. Urbino could not resist 
the temptation to study it. He knew it was the previous night’s game, for Jeremiah de 
Saint-Amour played at dusk every day of the week with at least three different opponents, 
but he always finished every game and then placed the board and chessmen in their box 
and stored the box in a desk drawer. The Doctor knew he played with the white pieces 
and that this time it was evident he was going to be defeated without mercy in four 
moves. “If there had been a crime, this would be a good clue,” Urbino said to himself. “I 
know only one man capable of devising this masterful trap.” If his life depended on it, he 
had to find out later why that indomitable soldier, accustomed to fighting to the last drop 
of blood, had left the final battle of his life unfinished. 

At six that morning, as he was making his last rounds, the night watchman had seen the 
note nailed to the street door: Come in without knocking and inform the police. A short 
while later the inspector arrived with the intern, and the two of them had searched the 
house for some evidence that might contradict the unmistakable breath of bitter almonds. 
But in the brief minutes the Doctor needed to study the unfinished game, the inspector 
discovered an envelope among the papers on the desk, addressed to Dr. Juvenal Urbino 
and sealed with so much sealing wax that it had to be ripped to pieces to get the letter out. 
The Doctor opened the black curtain over the window to have more light, gave a quick 
glance at the eleven sheets covered on both sides by a diligent handwriting, and when he 
had read the first paragraph he knew that he would miss Pentecost Communion. He read 
with agitated breath, turning back on several pages to find the thread he had lost, and 
when he finished he seemed to return from very far away and very long ago. His 
despondency was obvious despite his effort to control it: his lips were as blue as the 
corpse and he could not stop the trembling of his fingers as he refolded the letter and 
placed it in his vest pocket. Then he remembered the inspector and the young doctor, and 
he smiled at them through the mists of grief. 

“Nothing in particular,” he said. “His final instructions.” 

It was a half-truth, but they thought it complete because he ordered them to lift a loose 
tile from the floor, where they found a worn account book that contained the combination 
to the strongbox. There was not as much money as they expected, but it was more than 


enough for the funeral expenses and to meet other minor obligations. Then Dr. Urbino 
realized that he could not get to the Cathedral before the Gospel reading. 

“It’s the third time I’ve missed Sunday Mass since I’ve had the use of my reason,” he 
said. “But God understands.” 

So he chose to spend a few minutes more and attend to all the details, although he 
could hardly bear his intense longing to share the secrets of the letter with his wife. He 
promised to notify the numerous Caribbean refugees who lived in the city in case they 
wanted to pay their last respects to the man who had conducted himself as if he were the 
most respectable of them all, the most active and the most radical, even after it had 
become all too clear that he had been overwhelmed by the burden of disillusion. He 
would also inform his chess partners, who ranged from distinguished professional men to 
nameless laborers, as well as other, less intimate acquaintances who might perhaps wish 
to attend the funeral. Before he read the posthumous letter he had resolved to be first 
among them, but afterward he was not certain of anything. In any case, he was going to 
send a wreath of gardenias in the event that Jeremiah de Saint-Amour had repented at the 
last moment. The burial would be at five, which was the most suitable hour during the 
hottest months. If they needed him, from noon on he would be at the country house of Dr. 
Lácides Olivella, his beloved disciple, who was celebrating his silver anniversary in the 
profession with a formal luncheon that day. 

Once the stormy years of his early struggles were over, Dr. Juvenal Urbino had 
followed a set routine and achieved a respectability and prestige that had no equal in the 
province. He arose at the crack of dawn, when he began to take his secret medicines: 
potassium bromide to raise his spirits, salicylates for the ache in his bones when it rained, 
ergosterol drops for vertigo, belladonna for sound sleep. He took something every hour, 
always in secret, because in his long life as a doctor and teacher he had always opposed 
prescribing palliatives for old age: it was easier for him to bear other people’s pains than 
his own. In his pocket he always carried a little pad of camphor that he inhaled deeply 
when no one was watching to calm his fear of so many medicines mixed together. 

He would spend an hour in his study preparing for the class in general clinical 
medicine that he taught at the Medical School every morning, Monday through Saturday, 
at eight o’clock, until the day before his death. He was also an avid reader of the latest 
books that his bookseller in Paris mailed to him, or the ones from Barcelona that his local 
bookseller ordered for him, although he did not follow Spanish literature as closely as 
French. In any case, he never read them in the morning, but only for an hour after his 
siesta and at night before he went to sleep. When he was finished in the study he did 
fifteen minutes of respiratory exercises in front of the open window in the bathroom, 
always breathing toward the side where the roosters were crowing, which was where the 
air was new. Then he bathed, arranged his beard and waxed his mustache in an 
atmosphere saturated with genuine cologne from Farina Gegenüber, and dressed in white 
linen, with a vest and a soft hat and cordovan boots. At eighty-one years of age he 
preserved the same easygoing manner and festive spirit that he had on his return from 
Paris soon after the great cholera epidemic, and except for the metallic color, his carefully 
combed hair with the center part was the same as it had been in his youth. He breakfasted 
en famille but followed his own personal regimen of an infusion of wormwood blossoms 
for his stomach and a head of garlic that he peeled and ate a clove at a time, chewing each 
one carefully with bread, to prevent heart failure. After class it was rare for him not to 


have an appointment related to his civic initiatives, or his Catholic service, or his artistic 
and social innovations. 

He almost always ate lunch at home and had a ten-minute siesta on the terrace in the 
patio, hearing in his sleep the songs of the servant girls under the leaves of the mango 
trees, the cries of vendors on the street, the uproar of oil and motors from the bay whose 
exhaust fumes fluttered through the house on hot afternoons like an angel condemned to 
putrefaction. Then he read his new books for an hour, above all novels and works of 
history, and gave lessons in French and singing to the tame parrot who had been a local 
attraction for years. At four o’clock, after drinking a large glass of lemonade with ice, he 
left to call on his patients. In spite of his age he would not see patients in his office and 
continued to care for them in their homes as he always had, since the city was so 
domesticated that one could go anywhere in safety. 

After he returned from Europe the first time, he used the family landau, drawn by two 
golden chestnuts, but when this was no longer practical he changed it for a Victoria and a 
single horse, and he continued to use it, with a certain disdain for fashion, when carriages 
had already begun to disappear from the world and the only ones left in the city were for 
giving rides to tourists and carrying wreaths at funerals. Although he refused to retire, he 
was aware that he was called in only for hopeless cases, but he considered this a form of 
specialization too. He could tell what was wrong with a patient just by looking at him, he 
grew more and more distrustful of patent medicines, and he viewed with alarm the 
vulgarization of surgery. He would say: “The scalpel is the greatest proof of the failure of 
medicine.” He thought that, in a strict sense, all medication was poison and that seventy 
percent of common foods hastened death. “In any case,” he would say in class, “the little 
medicine we know is known only by a few doctors.” From youthful enthusiasm he had 
moved to a position that he himself defined as fatalistic humanism: “Each man is master 
of his own death, and all that we can do when the time comes is to help him die without 
fear of pain.” But despite these extreme ideas, which were already part of local medical 
folklore, his former pupils continued to consult him even after they were established in 
the profession, for they recognized in him what was called in those days a clinical eye. In 
any event, he was always an expensive and exclusive doctor, and his patients were 
concentrated in the ancestral homes in the District of the Viceroys. 

His daily schedule was so methodical that his wife knew where to send him a message 
if an emergency arose in the course of the afternoon. When he was a young man he 
would stop in the Parish Café before coming home, and this was where he perfected his 
chess game with his father-in-law’s cronies and some Caribbean refugees. But he had not 
returned to the Parish Café since the dawn of the new century, and he had attempted to 
organize national tournaments under the sponsorship of the Social Club. It was at this 
time that Jeremiah de Saint-Amour arrived, his knees already dead, not yet a photographer 
of children, yet in less than three months everyone who knew how to move a 
bishop across a chessboard knew who he was, because no one had been able to defeat 
him in a game. For Dr. Juvenal Urbino it was a miraculous meeting, at the very moment 
when chess had become an unconquerable passion for him and he no longer had many 
opponents who could satisfy it. 

Thanks to him, Jeremiah de Saint-Amour could become what he was among us. Dr. 
Urbino made himself his unconditional protector, his guarantor in everything, without 
even taking the trouble to learn who he was or what he did or what inglorious Avars he 


had come from in his crippled, broken state. He eventually lent him the money to set up 
his photography studio, and from the time he took his first picture of a child startled by 
the magnesium flash, Jeremiah de Saint-Amour paid back every last penny with religious 
regularity. 

It was all for chess. At first they played after supper at seven o’clock, with a reasonable 
handicap for Jeremiah de Saint-Amour because of his notable superiority, but the 
handicap was reduced until at last they played as equals. Later, when Don Galileo 
Daconte opened the first outdoor cinema, Jeremiah de Saint-Amour was one of his most 
dependable customers, and the games of chess were limited to the nights when a new film 
was not being shown. By then he and the Doctor had become such good friends that they 
would go to see the films together, but never with the Doctor’s wife, in part because she 
did not have the patience to follow the complicated plot lines, and in part because it 
always seemed to her, through sheer intuition, that Jeremiah de Saint-Amour was not a 
good companion for anyone. 

His Sundays were different. He would attend High Mass at the Cathedral and then 
return home to rest and read on the terrace in the patio. He seldom visited a patient on a 
holy day of obligation unless it was of extreme urgency, and for many years he had not 
accepted a social engagement that was not obligatory. On this Pentecost, in a rare 
coincidence, two extraordinary events had occurred: the death of a friend and the silver 
anniversary of an eminent pupil. Yet instead of going straight home as he had intended 
after certifying the death of Jeremiah de Saint-Amour, he allowed himself to be carried 
along by curiosity. 

As soon as he was in his carriage, he again consulted the posthumous letter and told the 
coachman to take him to an obscure location in the old slave quarter. That decision was 
so foreign to his usual habits that the coachman wanted to make certain there was no mistake. 
No, no mistake: the address was clear and the man who had written it had more than 
enough reason to know it very well. Then Dr. Urbino returned to the first page of the 
letter and plunged once again into the flood of unsavory revelations that might have 
changed his life, even at his age, if he could have convinced himself that they were not 
the ravings of a dying man. 

The sky had begun to threaten very early in the day and the weather was cloudy and 
cool, but there was no chance of rain before noon. In his effort to find a shorter route, the 
coachman braved the rough cobblestones of the colonial city and had to stop often to 
keep the horse from being frightened by the rowdiness of the religious societies and 
fraternities coming back from the Pentecost liturgy. The streets were full of paper 
garlands, music, flowers, and girls with colored parasols and muslin ruffles who watched 
the celebration from their balconies. In the Plaza of the Cathedral, where the statue of 
The Liberator was almost hidden among the African palm trees and the globes of the new 
streetlights, traffic was congested because Mass had ended, and not a seat was empty in 
the venerable and noisy Parish Café. Dr. Urbino’s was the only horse-drawn carriage; it 
was distinguishable from the handful left in the city because the patent-leather roof was 
always kept polished, and it had fittings of bronze that would not be corroded by salt, and 
wheels and poles painted red with gilt trimming like gala nights at the Vienna Opera. 
Furthermore, while the most demanding families were satisfied if their drivers had a 
clean shirt, he still required his coachman to wear livery of faded velvet and a top hat like 
a circus ringmaster’s, which, more than an anachronism, was thought to show a lack of 


compassion in the dog days of the Caribbean summer. 

Despite his almost maniacal love for the city and a knowledge of it superior to 
anyone’s, Dr. Juvenal Urbino had not often had reason as he did that Sunday to venture 
boldly into the tumult of the old slave quarter. The coachman had to make many turns 
and stop to ask directions several times in order to find the house. As they passed by the 
marshes, Dr. Urbino recognized their oppressive weight, their ominous silence, their 
suffocating gases, which on so many insomniac dawns had risen to his bedroom, 
blending with the fragrance of jasmine from the patio, and which he felt pass by him like 
a wind out of yesterday that had nothing to do with his life. But that pestilence so 
frequently idealized by nostalgia became an unbearable reality when the carriage began 
to lurch through the quagmire of the streets where buzzards fought over the 
slaughterhouse offal as it was swept along by the receding tide. Unlike the city of the 
Viceroys where the houses were made of masonry, here they were built of weathered 
boards and zinc roofs, and most of them rested on pilings to protect them from the 
flooding of the open sewers that had been inherited from the Spaniards. Everything 
looked wretched and desolate, but out of the sordid taverns came the thunder of riotous 
music, the godless drunken celebration of Pentecost by the poor. By the time they found 
the house, gangs of ragged children were chasing the carriage and ridiculing the theatrical 
finery of the coachman, who had to drive them away with his whip. Dr. Urbino, prepared 
for a confidential visit, realized too late that there was no innocence more dangerous than 
the innocence of age. 

The exterior of the unnumbered house was in no way distinguishable from its less 
fortunate neighbors, except for the window with lace curtains and an imposing front door 
taken from some old church. The coachman pounded the door knocker, and only when he 
had made certain that it was the right house did he help the Doctor out of the carriage. 
The door opened without a sound, and in the shadowy interior stood a mature woman 
dressed in black, with a red rose behind her ear. Despite her age, which was no less than 
forty, she was still a haughty mulatta with cruel golden eyes and hair tight to her skull 
like a helmet of steel wool. Dr. Urbino did not recognize her, although he had seen her 
several times in the gloom of the chess games in the photographer’s studio, and he had 
once written her a prescription for tertian fever. He held out his hand and she took it 
between hers, less in greeting than to help him into the house. The parlor had the climate 
and invisible murmur of a forest glade and was crammed with furniture and exquisite 
objects, each in its natural place. Dr. Urbino recalled without bitterness an antiquarian’s 
shop, No. 26 rue Montmartre in Paris, on an autumn Monday in the last century. The 
woman sat down across from him and spoke in accented Spanish. 

“This is your house, Doctor,” she said. “I did not expect you so soon.” 

Dr. Urbino felt betrayed. He stared at her openly, at her intense mourning, at the 
dignity of her grief, and then he understood that this was a useless visit because she knew 
more than he did about everything stated and explained in Jeremiah de Saint-Amour’s 
posthumous letter. This was true. She had been with him until a very few hours before his 
death, as she had been with him for half his life, with a devotion and submissive 
tenderness that bore too close a resemblance to love, and without anyone knowing 
anything about it in this sleepy provincial capital where even state secrets were common 
knowledge. They had met in a convalescent home in Port-au-Prince, where she had been 
born and where he had spent his early years as a fugitive, and she had followed him here 


a year later for a brief visit, although both of them knew without agreeing to anything that 
she had come to stay forever. She cleaned and straightened the laboratory once a week, 
but not even the most evil-minded neighbors confused appearance with reality because 
they, like everyone else, supposed that Jeremiah de Saint-Amour’s disability affected 
more than his capacity to walk. Dr. Urbino himself supposed as much for solid medical 
reasons, and never would have believed his friend had a woman if he himself had not 
revealed it in the letter. In any event, it was difficult for him to comprehend that two free 
adults without a past and living on the fringes of a closed society’s prejudices had chosen 
the hazards of illicit love. She explained: “It was his wish.” Moreover, a clandestine life 
shared with a man who was never completely hers, and in which they often knew the 
sudden explosion of happiness, did not seem to her a condition to be despised. On the 
contrary: life had shown her that perhaps it was exemplary. 

On the previous night they had gone to the cinema, each one separately, and had sat 
apart as they had done at least twice a month since the Italian immigrant, Don Galileo 
Daconte, had installed his open-air theater in the ruins of a seventeenth-century convent. 
They saw All Quiet on the Western Front, a film based on a book that had been popular 
the year before and that Dr. Urbino had read, his heart devastated by the barbarism of 
war. They met afterward in the laboratory, she found him brooding and nostalgic, and 
thought it was because of the brutal scenes of wounded men dying in the mud. In an 
attempt to distract him, she invited him to play chess and he accepted to please her, but 
he played inattentively, with the white pieces, of course, until he discovered before she 
did that he was going to be defeated in four moves and surrendered without honor. Then 
the Doctor realized that she had been his opponent in the final game, and not General 
Jerónimo Argote, as he had supposed. He murmured in astonishment: 

“It was masterful!” 

She insisted that she deserved no praise, but rather that Jeremiah de Saint-Amour, 
already lost in the mists of death, had moved his pieces without love. When he stopped 
the game at about a quarter past eleven, for the music from the public dances had ended, 
he asked her to leave him. He wanted to write a letter to Dr. Juvenal Urbino, whom he 
considered the most honorable man he had ever known, and his soul’s friend, as he liked 
to say, despite the fact that the only affinity between the two was their addic tion to chess 
understood as a dialogue of reason and not as a science. And then she knew that Jeremiah 
de Saint-Amour had come to the end of his suffering and that he had only enough life left 
to write the letter. The Doctor could not believe it. 

“So then you knew!” he exclaimed. 

She not only knew, she agreed, but she had helped him to endure the suffering as 
lovingly as she had helped him to discover happiness. Because that was what his last 
eleven months had been: cruel suffering. 

“Your duty was to report him,” said the Doctor. 

“I could not do that,” she said, shocked. “I loved him too much.” 

Dr. Urbino, who thought he had heard everything, had never heard anything like that, 
and said with such simplicity. He looked straight at her and tried with all his senses to fix 
her in his memory as she was at that moment: she seemed like a river idol, undaunted in 
her black dress, with her serpent’s eyes and the rose behind her ear. A long time ago, on a 
deserted beach in Haiti where the two of them lay naked after love, Jeremiah de Saint-
Amour had sighed: “I will never be old.” She interpreted this as a heroic determination to 


struggle without quarter against the ravages of time, but he was more specific: he had 
made the irrevocable decision to take his own life when he was seventy years old. 

He had turned seventy, in fact, on the twenty-third of January of that year, and then he 
had set the date as the night before Pentecost, the most important holiday in a city 
consecrated to the cult of the Holy Spirit. There was not a single detail of the previous 
night that she had not known about ahead of time, and they spoke of it often, suffering 
together the irreparable rush of days that neither of them could stop now. Jeremiah de 
Saint-Amour loved life with a senseless passion, he loved the sea and love, he loved his 
dog and her, and as the date approached he had gradually succumbed to despair as if his 
death had been not his own decision but an inexorable destiny. 

“Last night, when I left him, he was no longer of this world,” she said. 

She had wanted to take the dog with her, but he looked at the animal dozing beside the 
crutches and caressed him with the tips of his fingers. He said: “I’m sorry, but Mister 
Woodrow Wilson is coming with me.” He asked her to tie him to the leg of the cot while 
he wrote, and she used a false knot so that he could free himself. That had been her only 
act of disloyalty, and it was justified by her desire to remember the master in the wintry 
eyes of his dog. But Dr. Urbino interrupted her to say that the dog had not freed himself. 
She said: “Then it was because he did not want to.” And she was glad, because she 
preferred to evoke her dead lover as he had asked her to the night before, when he 
stopped writing the letter he had already begun and looked at her for the last time. 

“Remember me with a rose,” he said to her. 

She had returned home a little after midnight. She lay down fully dressed on her bed, to 
smoke one cigarette after another and give him time to finish what she knew was a long 
and difficult letter, and a little before three o’clock, when the dogs began to howl, she put 
the water for coffee on the stove, dressed in full mourning, and cut the first rose of dawn 
in the patio. Dr. Urbino already realized how completely he would repudiate the memory 
of that irredeemable woman, and he thought he knew why: only a person without 
principles could be so complaisant toward grief. 

And for the remainder of the visit she gave him even more justification. She would not 
go to the funeral, for that is what she had promised her lover, although Dr. Urbino 
thought he had read just the opposite in one of the paragraphs of the letter. She would not 
shed a tear, she would not waste the rest of her years simmering in the maggot broth of 
memory, she would not bury herself alive inside these four walls to sew her shroud, as 
native widows were expected to do. She intended to sell Jeremiah de Saint-Amour’s 
house and all its contents, which, according to the letter, now belonged to her, and she 
would go on living as she always had, without complaining, in this death trap of the poor 
where she had been happy. 

The words pursued Dr. Juvenal Urbino on the drive home: “this death trap of the poor.” 
It was not a gratuitous description. For the city, his city, stood unchanging on the edge of 
time: the same burning dry city of his nocturnal terrors and the solitary pleasures of 
puberty, where flowers rusted and salt corroded, where nothing had happened for four 
centuries except a slow aging among withered laurels and putrefying swamps. In winter 
sudden devastating downpours flooded the latrines and turned the streets into sickening 
bogs. In summer an invisible dust as harsh as red-hot chalk was blown into even the best-
protected corners of the imagination by mad winds that took the roofs off the houses and 
carried away children through the air. On Satur days the poor mulattoes, along with all 


their domestic animals and kitchen utensils, tumultuously abandoned their hovels of 
cardboard and tin on the edges of the swamps and in jubilant assault took over the rocky 
beaches of the colonial district. Until a few years ago, some of the older ones still bore 
the royal slave brand that had been burned onto their chests with flaming irons. During 
the weekend they danced without mercy, drank themselves blind on home-brewed 
alcohol, made wild love among the icaco plants, and on Sunday at midnight they broke 
up their own party with bloody free-for-alls. During the rest of the week the same 
impetuous mob swarmed into the plazas and alleys of the old neighborhoods with their 
stores of everything that could be bought and sold, and they infused the dead city with the 
frenzy of a human fair reeking of fried fish: a new life. 

Independence from Spain and then the abolition of slavery precipitated the conditions 
of honorable decadence in which Dr. Juvenal Urbino had been born and raised. The great 
old families sank into their ruined palaces in silence. Along the rough cobbled streets that 
had served so well in surprise attacks and buccaneer landings, weeds hung from the 
balconies and opened cracks in the whitewashed walls of even the best-kept mansions, 
and the only signs of life at two o’clock in the afternoon were languid piano exercises 
played in the dim light of siesta. Indoors, in the cool bedrooms saturated with incense, 
women protected themselves from the sun as if it were a shameful infection, and even at 
early Mass they hid their faces in their mantillas. Their love affairs were slow and 
difficult and were often disturbed by sinister omens, and life seemed interminable. At 
nightfall, at the oppressive moment of transition, a storm of carnivorous mosquitoes rose 
out of the swamps, and a tender breath of human shit, warm and sad, stirred the certainty 
of death in the depths of one’s soul. 

And so the very life of the colonial city, which the young Juvenal Urbino tended to 
idealize in his Parisian melancholy, was an illusion of memory. In the eighteenth century, 
the commerce of the city had been the most prosperous in the Caribbean, owing in the 
main to the thankless privilege of its being the largest African slave market in the 
Americas. It was also the permanent residence of the Viceroys of the New Kingdom of 
Granada, who preferred to govern here on the shores of the world’s ocean rather than in 
the distant freezing capital under a centuries-old drizzle that disturbed their sense of 
reality. Several times a year, fleets of galleons carrying the treasures of Potosí, Quito, and 
Veracruz gathered in the bay, and the city lived its years of glory. On Friday, June 8, 
1708, at four o’clock in the afternoon, the galleon San José set sail for Cádiz with a cargo 
of precious stones and metals valued at five hundred billion pesos in the currency of the 
day; it was sunk by an English squadron at the entrance to the port, and two long 
centuries later it had not yet been salvaged. That treasure lying in its bed of coral, and the 
corpse of the commander floating sideways on the bridge, were evoked by historians as 
an emblem of the city drowned in memories. 

Across the bay, in the residential district of La Manga, Dr. Juvenal Urbino’s house 
stood in another time. One-story, spacious and cool, it had a portico with Doric columns 
on the outside terrace, which commanded a view of the still, miasmic water and the 
debris from sunken ships in the bay. From the entrance door to the kitchen, the floor was 
covered with black and white checkerboard tiles, a fact often attributed to Dr. Urbino’s 
ruling passion without taking into account that this was a weakness common to the 
Catalonian craftsmen who built this district for the nouveaux riches at the beginning of 
the century. The large drawing room had the very high ceilings found throughout the rest 


of the house, and six full-length windows facing the street, and it was separated from the 
dining room by an enormous, elaborate glass door covered with branching vines and 
bunches of grapes and maidens seduced by the pipes of fauns in a bronze grove. The 
furnishings in the reception rooms, including the pendulum clock that stood like a living 
sentinel in the drawing room, were all original English pieces from the late nineteenth 
century, and the lamps that hung from the walls were all teardrop crystal, and there were 
Sèvres vases and bowls everywhere and little alabaster statues of pagan idylls. But that 
European coherence vanished in the rest of the house, where wicker armchairs were 
jumbled together with Viennese rockers and leather footstools made by local craftsmen. 
Splendid hammocks from San Jacinto, with multicolored fringe along the sides and the 
owner’s name embroidered in Gothic letters with silk thread, hung in the bedrooms along 
with the beds. Next to the dining room, the space that had originally been designed for 
gala suppers was used as a small music room for intimate concerts when famous 
performers came to the city. In order to enhance the silence, the tiles had been covered 
with the Turkish rugs purchased at the World’s Fair in Paris; a recent model of a victrola 
stood next to a stand that held records arranged with care, and in a corner, draped with a 
Manila shawl, was the piano that Dr. Urbino had not played for many years. Throughout 
the house one could detect the good sense and care of a woman whose feet were planted 
firmly on the ground. 

But no other room displayed the meticulous solemnity of the library, the sanctuary of 
Dr. Urbino until old age carried him off. There, all around his father’s walnut desk and 
the tufted leather easy chairs, he had lined the walls and even the windows with shelves 
behind glass doors, and had arranged in an almost demented order the three thousand 
volumes bound in identical calfskin with his initials in gold on the spines. Unlike the 
other rooms, which were at the mercy of noise and foul winds from the port, the library 
always enjoyed the tranquillity and fragrance of an abbey. Born and raised in the 
Caribbean superstition that one opened doors and windows to summon a coolness that in 
fact did not exist, Dr. Urbino and his wife at first felt their hearts oppressed by enclosure. 
But in the end they were convinced of the merits of the Roman strategy against heat, 
which consists of closing houses during the lethargy of August in order to keep out the 
burning air from the street, and then opening them up completely to the night breezes. 
And from that time on theirs was the coolest house under the furious La Manga sun, and 
it was a delight to take a siesta in the darkened bedrooms and to sit on the portico in the 
afternoon to watch the heavy, ash-gray freighters from New Orleans pass by, and at dusk 
to see the wooden paddles of the riverboats with their shining lights, purifying the 
stagnant garbage heap of the bay with the wake of their music. It was also the best 
protected from December through March, when the northern winds tore away roofs and 
spent the night circling like hungry wolves looking for a crack where they could slip in. 
No one ever thought that a marriage rooted in such foundations could have any reason 
not to be happy. 

In any case, Dr. Urbino was not when he returned home that morning before ten 
o’clock, shaken by the two visits that not only had obliged him to miss Pentecost Mass 
but also threatened to change him at an age when everything had seemed complete. He 
wanted a short siesta until it was time for Dr. Lácides Olivella’s gala luncheon, but he 
found the servants in an uproar as they attempted to catch the parrot, who had flown to 
the highest branches of the mango tree when they took him from his cage to clip his 


wings. He was a deplumed, maniacal parrot who did not speak when asked to but only 
when it was least expected, but then he did so with a clarity and rationality that were 
uncommon among human beings. He had been tutored by Dr. Urbino himself, which 
afforded him privileges that no one else in the family ever had, not even the children 
when they were young. 

He had lived in the house for over twenty years, and no one knew how many years he 
had been alive before then. Every afternoon after his siesta, Dr. Urbino sat with him on 
the terrace in the patio, the coolest spot in the house, and he had summoned the most 
diligent reserves of his passion for pedagogy until the parrot learned to speak French like 
an academician. Then, just for love of the labor, he taught him the Latin accompaniment 
to the Mass and selected passages from the Gospel according to St. Matthew, and he tried 
without success to inculcate in him a working notion of the four arithmetic functions. On 
one of his last trips to Europe he brought back the first phonograph with a trumpet 
speaker, along with many of the latest popular records as well as those by his favorite 
classical composers. Day after day, over and over again for several months, he played the 
songs of Yvette Guilbert and Aristide Bruant, who had charmed France during the last 
century, until the parrot learned them by heart. He sang them in a woman’s voice if they 
were hers, in a tenor’s voice if they were his, and ended with impudent laughter that was 
a masterful imitation of the servant girls when they heard him singing in French. The 
fame of his accomplishments was so widespread that on occasion distinguished visitors 
who had traveled from the interior on the riverboats would ask permission to see him, and 
once some of the many English tourists, who in those days sailed the banana boats from 
New Orleans, would have bought him at any price. But the day of his greatest glory was 
when the President of the Republic, Don Marco Fidel Suárez, with his entourage of 
cabinet ministers, visited the house in order to confirm the truth of his reputation. They 
arrived at about three o’clock in the afternoon, suffocating in the top hats and frock coats 
they had worn during three days of official visits under the burning August sky, and they 
had to leave as curious as when they arrived, because for two desperate hours the parrot 
refused to say a single syllable, ignoring the pleas and threats and public humiliation of 
Dr. Urbino, who had insisted on that foolhardy invitation despite the sage warnings of his 
wife. 

The fact that the parrot could maintain his privileges after that historic act of defiance 
was the ultimate proof of his sacred rights. No other animal was permitted in the house, 
with the exception of the land turtle who had reappeared in the kitchen after three or four 
years, when everyone thought he was lost forever. He, however, was not considered a 
living being but rather a mineral good luck charm whose location one could never be 
certain of. Dr. Urbino was reluctant to confess his hatred of animals, which he disguised 
with all kinds of scientific inventions and philosophical pretexts that convinced many, but 
not his wife. He said that people who loved them to excess were capable of the worst 
cruelties toward human beings. He said that dogs were not loyal but servile, that cats 
were opportunists and traitors, that peacocks were heralds of death, that macaws were 
simply decorative annoyances, that rabbits fomented greed, that monkeys carried the 
fever of lust, and that roosters were damned because they had been complicit in the three 
denials of Christ. 

On the other hand, Fermina Daza, his wife, who at that time was seventy-two years old 
and had already lost the doe’s gait of her younger days, was an irrational idolater of 


tropical flowers and domestic animals, and early in her marriage she had taken advantage 
of the novelty of love to keep many more of them in the house than good sense would 
allow. The first were three Dalmatians named after Roman emperors, who fought for the 
favors of a female who did honor to her name of Messalina, for it took her longer to give 
birth to nine pups than to conceive another ten. Then there were Abyssinian cats with the 
profiles of eagles and the manners of pharaohs, cross-eyed Siamese and palace Persians 
with orange eyes, who walked through the rooms like shadowy phantoms and shattered 
the night with the howling of their witches’ sabbaths of love. For several years an 
Amazonian monkey, chained by his waist to the mango tree in the patio, elicited a certain 
compassion because he had the sorrowful face of Archbishop Obdulio y Rey, the same 
candid eyes, the same eloquent hands; that, however, was not the reason Fermina got rid 
of him, but because he had the bad habit of pleasuring himself in honor of the ladies. 

There were all kinds of Guatemalan birds in cages along the passageways, and 
premonitory curlews, and swamp herons with long yellow legs, and a young stag who 
came in through the windows to eat the anthurium in the flowerpots. Shortly before the 
last civil war, when there was talk for the first time of a possible visit by the Pope, they 
had brought a bird of paradise from Guatemala, but it took longer to arrive than to return 
to its homeland when it was learned that the announcement of the pontifical visit had 
been a lie spread by the government to alarm the conspiratorial Liberals. Another time, 
on the smugglers’ ships from Curaçao, they bought a wicker cage with six perfumed 
crows identical to the ones that Fermina Daza had kept as a girl in her father’s house and 
that she still wanted to have as a married woman. But no one could bear the continual 
flapping of their wings that filled the house with the reek of funeral wreaths. They also 
brought in an anaconda, four meters long, whose insomniac hunter’s sighs disturbed the 
darkness in the bedrooms although it accomplished what they had wanted, which was to 
frighten with its mortal breath the bats and salamanders and countless species of harmful 
insects that invaded the house during the rainy months. Dr. Juvenal Urbino, so occupied 
at that time with his professional obligations and so absorbed in his civic and cultural 
enterprises, was content to assume that in the midst of so many abominable creatures his 
wife was not only the most beautiful woman in the Caribbean but also the happiest. But 
one rainy afternoon, at the end of an exhausting day, he encountered a disaster in the 
house that brought him to his senses. Out of the drawing room, and for as far as the eye 
could see, a stream of dead animals floated in a marsh of blood. The servant girls had 
climbed on the chairs, not knowing what to do, and they had not yet recovered from the 
panic of the slaughter. 

One of the German mastiffs, maddened by a sudden attack of rabies, had torn to pieces 
every animal of any kind that crossed its path, until the gardener from the house next 
door found the courage to face him and hack him to pieces with his machete. No one 
knew how many creatures he had bitten or contaminated with his green slaverings, and so 
Dr. Urbino ordered the survivors killed and their bodies burned in an isolated field, and 
he requested the services of Misericordia Hospital for a thorough disinfecting of the 
house. The only animal to escape, because nobody remembered him, was the giant lucky 
charm tortoise. 

Fermina Daza admitted for the first time that her husband was right in a domestic 
matter, and for a long while afterward she was careful to say no more about animals. She 
consoled herself with color illustrations from Linnaeus’s Natural History, which she 


framed and hung on the drawing room walls, and perhaps she would eventually have lost 
all hope of ever seeing an animal in the house again if it had not been for the thieves who, 
early one morning, forced a bathroom window and made off with the silver service that 
had been in the family for five generations. Dr. Urbino put double padlocks on the 
window frames, secured the doors on the inside with iron crossbars, placed his most 
valuable possessions in the strongbox, and belatedly acquired the wartime habit of 
sleeping with a revolver under his pillow. But he opposed the purchase of a fierce dog, 
vaccinated or unvaccinated, running loose or chained up, even if thieves were to steal 
everything he owned. 

“Nothing that does not speak will come into this house,” he said. 

He said it to put an end to the specious arguments of his wife, who was once again 
determined to buy a dog, and he never imagined that his hasty generalization was to cost 
him his life. Fermina Daza, whose straightforward character had become more subtle 
with the years, seized on her husband’s casual words, and months after the robbery she 
returned to the ships from Curaçao and bought a royal Paramaribo parrot, who knew only 
the blasphemies of sailors but said them in a voice so human that he was well worth the 
extravagant price of twelve centavos. 

He was a fine parrot, lighter than he seemed, with a yellow head and a black tongue, 
the only way to distinguish him from mangrove parrots who did not learn to speak even 
with turpentine suppositories. Dr. Urbino, a good loser, bowed to the ingenuity of his 
wife and was even surprised at how amused he was by the advances the parrot made 
when he was excited by the servant girls. On rainy afternoons, his tongue loosened by the 
pleasure of having his feathers drenched, he uttered phrases from another time, which he 
could not have learned in the house and which led one to think that he was much older 
than he appeared. The Doctor’s final doubts collapsed one night when the thieves tried to 
get in again through a skylight in the attic, and the parrot frightened them with a mastiff’s 
barking that could not have been more realistic if it had been real, and with shouts of stop 
thief stop thief stop thief, two saving graces he had not learned in the house. It was then 
that Dr. Urbino took charge of him and ordered the construction of a perch under the 
mango tree with a container for water, another for ripe bananas, and a trapeze for 
acrobatics. From December through March, when the nights were cold and the north 
winds made living outdoors unbearable, he was taken ins ide to sleep in the bedrooms in a 
cage covered by a blanket, although Dr. Urbino suspected that his chronic swollen glands 
might be a threat to the healthy respiration of humans. For many years they clipped his 
wing feathers and let him wander wherever he chose to walk with his hulking old 
horseman’s gait. But one day he began to do acrobatic tricks on the beams in the kitchen 
and fell into the pot of stew with a sailor’s shout of every man for himself, and with such 
good luck that the cook managed to scoop him out with the ladle, scalded and deplumed 
but still alive. From then on he was kept in the cage even during the daytime, in defiance 
of the vulgar belief that caged parrots forget everything they have learned, and let out 
only in the four o’clock coolness for his classes with Dr. Urbino on the terrace in the 
patio. No one realized in time that his wings were too long, and they were about to clip 
them that morning when he escaped to the top of the mango tree. 

And for three hours they had not been able to catch him. The servant girls, with the 
help of other maids in the neighborhood, had used all kinds of tricks to lure him down, 
but he insisted on staying where he was, laughing madly as he shouted long live the 


Liberal Party, long live the Liberal Party damn it, a reckless cry that had cost many a 
carefree drunk his life. Dr. Urbino could barely see him amid the leaves, and he tried to 
cajole him in Spanish and French and even in Latin, and the parrot responded in the same 
languages and with the same emphasis and timbre in his voice, but he did not move from 
his treetop. Convinced that no one was going to make him move voluntarily, Dr. Urbino 
had them send for the fire department, his most recent civic pastime. 

Until just a short time before, in fact, fires had been put out by volunteers using 
brickmasons’ ladders and buckets of water carried in from wherever it could be found, 
and methods so disorderly that they sometimes caused more damage than the fires. But 
for the past year, thanks to a fund- organized by the Society for Public Improvement, of 
which Juvenal Urbino was honorary president, there was a corps of professional firemen 
and a water truck with a siren and a bell and two high-pressure hoses. They were so 
popular that classes were suspended when the church bells were heard sounding the 
alarm, so that children could watch them fight the fire. At first that was all they did. But 
Dr. Urbino told the municipal authorities that in Hamburg he had seen firemen revive a 
boy found frozen in a basement after a three-day snowstorm. He had also seen them in a 
Neapolitan alley lowering a corpse in his coffin from a tenth-floor balcony because the 
stairway in the building had so many twists and turns that the family could not get him 
down to the street. That was how the local firemen learned to render other emergency services, 
such as forcing locks or killing poisonous snakes, and the Medical School offered 
them a special course in first aid for minor accidents. So it was in no way peculiar to ask 
them to please get a distinguished parrot, with all the qualities of a gentleman, out of a 
tree. Dr. Urbino said: “Tell them it’s for me.” And he went to his bedroom to dress for 
the gala luncheon. The truth was that at that moment, devastated by the letter from 
Jeremiah de Saint-Amour, he did not really care about the fate of the parrot. 

Fermina Daza had put on a loose-fitting silk dress belted at the hip, a necklace of real 
pearls with six long, uneven loops, and high-heeled satin shoes that she wore only on 
very solemn occasions, for by now she was too old for such abuses. Her stylish attire did 
not seem appropriate for a venerable grandmother, but it suited her figure--long-boned 
and still slender and erect, her resilient hands without a single age spot, her steel-blue hair 
bobbed on a slant at her cheek. Her clear almond eyes and her inborn haughtiness were 
all that were left to her from her wedding portrait, but what she had been deprived of by 
age she more than made up for in character and diligence. She felt very well: the time of 
iron corsets, bound waists, and bustles that exaggerated buttocks was receding into the 
past. Liberated bodies, breathing freely, showed themselves for what they were. Even at 
the age of seventy-two. 

Dr. Urbino found her sitting at her dressing table under the slow blades of the electric 
fan, putting on her bell-shaped hat decorated with felt violets. The bedroom was large and 
bright, with an English bed protected by mosquito netting embroidered in pink, and two 
windows open to the trees in the patio, where one could hear the clamor of cicadas, giddy 
with premonitions of rain. Ever since their return from their honeymoon, Fermina Daza 
had chosen her husband’s clothes according to the weather and the occasion, and laid 
them out for him on a chair the night before so they would be ready for him when he 
came out of the bathroom. She could not remember when she had also begun to help him 
dress, and finally to dress him, and she was aware that at first she had done it for love, but 
for the past five years or so she had been obliged to do it regardless of the reason because 


he could not dress himself. They had just celebrated their golden wedding anniversary, 
and they were not capable of living for even an instant without the other, or without 
thinking about the other, and that capacity diminished as their age increased. Neither 
could have said if their mutual dependence was based on love or convenience, but they 
had never asked the question with their ha nds on their hearts because both had always 
preferred not to know the answer. Little by little she had been discovering the uncertainty 
of her husband’s step, his mood changes, the gaps in his memory, his recent habit of 
sobbing while he slept, but she did not identify these as the unequivocal signs of final 
decay but rather as a happy return to childhood. That was why she did not treat him like a 
difficult old man but as a senile baby, and that deception was providential for the two of 
them because it put them beyond the reach of pity. 

Life would have been quite another matter for them both if they had learned in time 
that it was easier to avoid great matrimonial catastrophes than trivial everyday miseries. 
But if they had learned anything together, it was that wisdom comes to us when it can no 
longer do any good. For years Fermina Daza had endured her husband’s jubilant dawns 
with a bitter heart. She clung to the last threads of sleep in order to avoid facing the 
fatality of another morning full of sinister premonitions, while he awoke with the 
innocence of a newborn: each new day was one more day he had won. She heard him 
awake with the roosters, and his first sign of life was a cough without rhyme or reason 
that seemed intended to awaken her too. She heard him grumble, just to annoy her, while 
he felt around for the slippers that were supposed to be next to the bed. She heard him 
make his way to the bathroom, groping in the dark. After an hour in his study, when she 
had fallen asleep again, he would come back to dress, still without turning on the light. 
Once, during a party game, he had been asked how he defined himself, and he had said: 
“I am a man who dresses in the dark.” She heard him, knowing full well that not one of 
those noises was indispensable, and that he made them on purpose although he pretended 
not to, just as she was awake and pretended not to be. His motives were clear: he never 
needed her awake and lucid as much as he did during those fumbling moments. 

There was no sleeper more elegant than she, with her curved body posed for a dance 
and her hand across her forehead, but there was also no one more ferocious when anyone 
disturbed the sensuality of her thinking she was still asleep when she no longer was. Dr. 
Urbino knew she was waiting for his slightest sound, that she even would be grateful for 
it, just so she could blame someone for waking her at five o’clock in the morning, so that 
on the few occasions when he had to feel around in the dark because he could not find his 
slippers in their customary place, she would suddenly say in a sleepy voice: “You left 
them in the bathroom last night.” Then right after that, her voice fully awake with rage, 
she would curse: “The worst misfortune in this house is that nobody lets you sleep.” 

Then she would roll over in bed and turn on the light without the least mercy for 
herself, content with her first victory of the day. The truth was they both played a game, 
mythical and perverse, but for all that comforting: it was one of the many dangerous 
pleasures of domestic love. But one of those trivial games almost ended the first thirty 
years of their life together, because one day there was no soap in the bathroom. 

It began with routine simplicity. Dr. Juvenal Urbino had returned to the bedroom, in 
the days when he still bathed without help, and begun to dress without turning on the 
light. As usual she was in her warm fetal state, her eyes closed, her breathing shallow, 
that arm from a sacred dance above her head. But she was only half asleep, as usual, and 


he knew it. After a prolonged sound of starched linen in the darkness, Dr. Urbino said to 

himself: 

“I’ve been bathing for almost a week without any soap.” 

Then, fully awake, she remembered, and tossed and turned in fury with the world 
because in fact she had forgotten to replace the soap in the bathroom. She had noticed its 
absence three days earlier when she was already under the shower, and she had planned 
to replace it afterward, but then she forgot until the next day, and on the third day the 
same thing happened again. The truth was that a week had not gone by, as he said to 
make her feel more guilty, but three unpardonable days, and her anger at being found out 
in a mistake maddened her. As always, she defended herself by attacking. 

“Well I’ve bathed every day,” she shouted, beside herself with rage, “and there’s 
always been soap.” 

Although he knew her battle tactics by heart, this time he could not abide them. On 
some professional pretext or other he went to live in the interns’ quarters at Misericordia 
Hospital, returning home only to change his clothes before making his evening house 
calls. She headed for the kitchen when she heard him come in, pretending that she had 
something to do, and stayed there until she heard his carriage in the street. For the next 
three months, each time they tried to resolve the conflict they only inflamed their feelings 
even more. He was not ready to come back as long as she refused to admit there had been 
no soap in the bathroom, and she was not prepared to have him back until he recognized 
that he had consciously lied to torment her. 

The incident, of course, gave them the opportunity to evoke many other trivial quarrels 
from many other dim and turbulent dawns. Resentments stirred up other resentments, 
reopened old scars, turned them into fresh wounds, and both were dismayed at the 
desolating proof that in so many years of conjugal battling they had done little more than 
nurture their rancor. At last he proposed that they both submit to an open confession, with 
the Archbishop himself if necessary, so that God could decide once and for all whether or 
not there had been soap in the soap dish in the bathroom. Then, despite all her self-
control, she lost her temper with a historic cry: 

“To hell with the Archbishop!” 

The impropriety shook the very foundations of the city, gave rise to slanders that were 
not easy to disprove, and was preserved in popular tradition as if it were a line from an 
operetta: “To hell with the Archbishop!” Realizing she had gone too far, she anticipated 
her husband’s predictable response and threatened to move back to her father’s old house, 
which still belonged to her although it had been rented out for public offices, and live 
there by herself. And it was not an idle threat: she really did want to leave and did not 
care about the scandal, and her husband realized this in time. He did not have the courage 
to defy his own prejudices, and he capitulated. Not in the sense that he admitted there had 
been soap in the bathroom, but insofar as he continued to live in the same house with her, 
although they slept in separate rooms, and he did not say a word to her. They ate in 
silence, sparring with so much skill that they sent each other messages across the table 
through the children, and the children never realized that they were not speaking to each 
other. 

Since the study had no bathroom, the arrangement solved the problem of noise in the 
morning, because he came in to bathe after preparing his class and made a sincere effort 
not to awaken his wife. They would often arrive at the bathroom at the same time, and 


then they took turns brushing their teeth before going to sleep. After four months had 
gone by, he lay down on their double bed one night to read until she came out of the 
bathroom, as he often did, and he fell asleep. She lay down beside him in a rather careless 
way so that he would wake up and leave. And in fact he did stir, but instead of getting up 
he turned out the light and settled himself on the pillow. She shook him by the shoulder 
to remind him that he was supposed to go to the study, but it felt so comfortable to be 
back in his great-grandparents’ featherbed that he preferred to capitulate. 

“Let me stay here,” he said. “There was soap.” 

When they recalled this episode, now they had rounded the corner of old age, neither 
could believe the astonishing truth that this had been the most serious argument in fifty 
years of living together, and the only one that had made them both want to abandon their 
responsibilities and begin a new life. Even when they were old and placid they were 
careful about bringing it up, for the barely healed wounds could begin to bleed again as if 
they had been inflicted only yesterday. 

He was the first man that Fermina Daza heard urinate. She heard him on their wedding 
night, while she lay prostrate with seasickness in the stateroom on the ship that was 
carrying them to France, and the sound of his stallion’s stream seemed so potent, so 
replete with authority, that it increased her terror of the devastation to come. That 
memory often returned to her as the years weakened the stream, for she never could 
resign herself to his wetting the rim of the toilet bowl each time he used it. Dr. Urbino 
tried to convince her, with arguments readily understandable to anyone who wished to 
understand them, that the mishap was not repeated every day through carelessness on his 
part, as she insisted, but because of organic reasons: as a young man his stream was so 
defined and so direct that when he was at school he won contests for marksmanship in 
filling bottles, but with the ravages of age it was not only decreasing, it was also 
becoming oblique and scattered, and had at last turned into a .fantastic fountain, 
impossible to control despite his many efforts to direct it. He would say: “The toilet must 
have been invented by someone who knew nothing about men.” He contributed to 
domestic peace with a quotidian act that was more humiliating than humble: he wiped the 
rim of the bowl with toilet paper each time he used it. She knew, but never said anything 
as long as the ammoniac fumes were not too strong in the bathroom, and then she 
proclaimed, as if she had uncovered a crime: “This stinks like a rabbit hutch.” On the eve 
of old age this physical difficulty inspired Dr. Urbino with the ultimate solution: he 
urinated sitting down, as she did, which kept the bowl clean and him in a state of grace. 

By this time he could do very little for himself, and the possibility of a fatal slip in the 
tub put him on his guard against the shower. The house was modern and did not have the 
pewter tub with lion’s-paw feet common in the mansions of the old city. He had had it 
removed for hygienic reasons: the bathtub was another piece of abominable junk invented 
by Europeans who bathed only on the last Friday of the month, and then in the same 
water made filthy by the very dirt they tried to remove from their bodies. So he had 
ordered an outsized washtub made of solid lignum vitae, in which Fermina Daza bathed 
her husband just as if he were a newborn child. Waters boiled with mallow leaves and 
orange skins were mixed into the bath that lasted over an hour, and the effect on him was 
so sedative that he sometimes fell asleep in the perfumed infusion. After bathing him, 
Fermina Daza helped him to dress: she sprinkled talcum powder between his legs, she 
smoothed cocoa butter on his rashes, she helped him put on his undershorts with as much 


love as if they had been a diaper, and continued dressing him, item by item, from his 
socks to the knot in his tie with the topaz pin. Their conjugal dawns grew calm because 
he had returned to the childhood his children had taken away from him. And she, in turn, 
at last accepted the domestic schedule because the years were passing for her too; she 
slept less and less, and by the time she was seventy she was awake before her husband. 

On Pentecost Sunday, when he lifted the blanket to look at Jeremiah de Saint-Amour’s 
body, Dr. Urbino experienced the revelation of something that had been denied him until 
then in his most lucid peregrinations as a physician and a believer. After so many years of 
familiarity with death, after battling it for so long, after so much turning it inside out and 
upside down, it was as if he had dared to look death in the face for the first time, and it 
had looked back at him. It was not the fear of death. No: that fear had been inside him for 
many years, it had lived with him, it had been another shadow cast over his own shadow 
ever since the night he awoke, shaken by a bad dream, and realized that death was not 
only a permanent probability, as he had always believed, but an immediate reality. What 
he had seen that day, however, was the physical presence of something that until that 
moment had been only an imagined certainty. He was very glad that the instrument used 
by Divine Providence for that overwhelming revelation had been Jeremiah de Saint-
Amour, whom he had always considered a saint unaware of his own state of grace. But 
when the letter revealed his true identity, his sinister past, his inconceivable powers of 
deception, he felt that something definitive and irrevocable had occurred in his life. 

Nevertheless Fermina Daza did not allow him to infect her with his somber mood. He 
tried, of course, while she helped him put his legs into his trousers and worked the long 
row of buttons on his shirt. But he failed because Fermina Daza was not easy to impress, 
least of all by the death of a man she did not care for. All she knew about him was that 
Jeremiah de Saint-Amour was a cripple on crutches whom she had never seen, that he 
had escaped the firing squad during one of many insurrections on one of many islands in 
the Antilles, that he had become a photographer of children out of necessity and had 
become the most successful one in the province, and that he had won a game of chess 
from someone she remembered as Torremolinos but in reality was named Capablanca. 

“But he was nothing more than a fugitive from Cayenne, condemned to life 
imprisonment for an atrocious crime,” said Dr. Urbino. “Imagine, he had even eaten 
human flesh.” 

He handed her the letter whose secrets he wanted to carry with him to the grave, but 
she put the folded sheets in her dressing table without reading them and locked the 
drawer with a key. She was accustomed to her husband’s unfathomable capacity for 
astonishment, his exaggerated opinions that became more incomprehensible as the years 
went by, his narrowness of mind that was out of tune with his public image. But this time 
he had outdone himself. She had supposed that her husband held Jeremiah de Saint-
Amour in esteem not for what he had once been but for what he began to be after he 
arrived here with only his exile’s rucksack, and she could not understand why he was so 
distressed by the disclosure of his true identity at this late date. She did not comprehend 
why he thought it an abomination that he had had a woman in secret, since that was an 
atavistic custom of a certain kind of man, himself included, yes even he in a moment of 
ingratitude, and besides, it seemed to her a heartbreaking proof of love that she had 
helped him carry out his decision to die. She said: “If you also decided to do that for 
reasons as serious as his, my duty would be to do what she did.” Once again Dr. Urbino 


found himself face to face with the simple incomprehension that had exasperated him for 
a half a century. 

“You don’t understand anything,” he said. “What infuriates me is not what he was or 
what he did, but the deception he practiced on all of us for so many years.” 

His eyes began to fill with easy tears, but she pretended not to see. 

“He did the right thing,” she replied. “If he had told the truth, not you or that poor 
woman or anybody in this town would have loved him as much as they did.” 

She threaded his watch chain through the buttonhole in his vest. She put the finishing 
touches to the knot in his tie and pinned on his topaz tiepin. Then she dried his eyes and 
wiped his teary beard with the handkerchief sprinkled with florida water and put that in 
his breast pocket, its corners spread open like a magnolia. The eleven strokes of the 
pendulum clock sounded in the depths of the house. 

“Hurry,” she said, taking him by the arm. “We’ll be late.” 

Aminta Dechamps, Dr. Lácides Olivella’s wife, and her seven equally diligent 
daughters, had arranged every detail so that the silver anniversary luncheon would be the 
social event of the year. The family home, in the very center of the historic district, was 
the old mint, denatured by a Florentine architect who came through here like an ill wind 
blowing renovation and converted many seventeenth-century relics into Venetian 
basilicas. It had six bedrooms and two large, well-ventilated dining and reception rooms, 
but that was not enough space for the guests from the city, not to mention the very select 
few from out of town. The patio was like an abbey cloister, with a stone fountain 
murmuring in the center and pots of heliotrope that perfumed the house at dusk, but the 
space among the arcades was inadequate for so many grand family names. So it was 
decided to hold the luncheon in their country house that was ten minutes away by 
automobile along the King’s Highway and, had over an acre of patio, and enormous 
Indian laurels, and local water lilies in a gently flowing river. The men from Don 
Sancho’s Inn, under the supervision of Señora de Olivella, hung colored canvas awnings 
in the sunny areas and raised a platform under the laurels with tables for one hundred 
twenty-two guests, with a linen tableclo th on each of them and bouquets of the day’s 
fresh roses for the table of honor. They also built a wooden dais for a woodwind band 
whose program was limited to contradances and national waltzes, and for a string quartet 
from the School of Fine Arts, which was Señora de Olivella’s surprise for her husband’s 
venerable teacher, who would preside over the luncheon. Although the date did not 
correspond exactly to the anniversary of his graduation, they chose Pentecost Sunday in 
order to magnify the significance of the celebration. 

The preparations had begun three months earlier, for fear that something indispensable 
would be left undone for lack of time. They brought in live chickens from Ciénaga de 
Oro, famous all along the coast not only for their size and flavor but because in colonial 
times they had scratched for food in alluvial deposits and little nuggets of pure gold were 
found in their gizzards. Señora de Olivella herself, accompanied by some of her 
daughters and her domestic staff, boarded the luxury ocean liners and selected the best 
from everywhere to honor her husband’s achievements. She had anticipated everything 
except that the celebration would take place on a Sunday in June in a year when the rains 
were late. She realized the danger that very morning when she went to High Mass and 
was horrified by the humidity and saw that the sky was heavy and low and that one could 
not see to the ocean’s horizon. Despite these ominous signs, the Director of the 


Astronomical Observatory, whom she met at Mass, reminded her that in all the troubled 
history of the city, even during the crudest winters, it had never rained on Pentecost. Still, 
when the clocks struck twelve and many of the guests were already having an aperitif 
outdoors, a single crash of thunder made the earth tremble, and a turbulent wind from the 
sea knocked over the tables and blew down the canopies, and the sky collapsed in a 
catastrophic downpour. 

In the chaos of the storm Dr. Juvenal Urbino, along with the other late guests whom he 
had met on the road, had great difficulty reaching the house, and like them he wanted to 
move from the carriage to the house by jumping from stone to stone across the muddy 
patio, but at last he had to accept the humiliation of being carried by Don Sancho’s men 
under a yellow canvas canopy. They did the best they could to set up the separate tables 
again inside the house--even in the bedrooms--and the guests made no effort to disguise 
their surly, shipwrecked mood. It was as hot as a ship’s boiler room, for the windows had 
to be closed to keep out the wind-driven rain. In the patio each place at the tables had 
been marked with a card bearing the name of the guest, one side reserved for men and the 
other for women, according to custom. But inside the house the name cards were in 
confusion and people sat where they could in an obligatory promiscuity that defied our 
social superstitions on at least this one occasion. In the midst of the cataclysm Aminta de 
Olivella seemed to be everywhere at once, her hair soaking wet and her splendid dress 
spattered with mud, but bearing up under the misfortune with the invincible smile, 
learned from her husband, that would give no quarter to adversity. With the help of her 
daughters, who were cut from the same cloth, she did everything possible to keep the 
places at the table of honor in order, with Dr. Juvenal Urbino in the center and 
Archbishop Obdulio y Rey on his right. Fermina Daza sat next to her husband, as she 
always did, for fear he would fall asleep during the meal or spill soup on his lapel. Across 
from him sat Dr. Lácides Olivella, a well-preserved man of about fifty with an effeminate 
air, whose festive spirit seemed in no way related to his accurate diagnoses. The rest of 
the table was occupied by provincial and municipal officials and last year’s beauty queen, 
whom the Governor escorted to the seat next to him. Although it was not customary for 
invitations to request special attire, least of all for a luncheon in the country, the women 
wore evening gowns and precious jewels and most of the men were dressed in dinner 
jackets with black ties, and some even wore frock coats. Only the most sophisticated, Dr. 
Urbino among them, wore their ordinary clothes. At each place was a menu printed in 
French, with golden vignettes. 

Señora de Olivella, horror-struck by the devastating heat, went through the house 
pleading with the men to take off their jackets during the luncheon, but no one dared to 
be the first. The Archbishop commented to Dr. Urbino that in a sense this was a historic 
luncheon: there, together for the first time at the same table, their wounds healed and 
their anger dissipated, sat the two opposing sides in the civil wars that had bloodied the 
country ever since Independence. This thought accorded with the enthusiasm of the 
Liberals, especially the younger ones, who had succeeded in electing a president from 
their party after forty-five years of Conservative hegemony. Dr. Urbino did not agree: in 
his opinion a Liberal president was exactly the same as a Conservative president, but not 
as well dressed. But he did not want to contradict the Archbishop, although he would 
have liked to point out to him that guests were at that luncheon not because of what they 
thought but because of the merits of their lineage, which was something that had always 


stood over and above the hazards of politics and the horrors of war. From this point of 
view, in fact, not a single person was missing. 

The downpour ended as suddenly as it had begun, and the sun began to shine in a 
cloudless sky, but the storm had been so violent that several trees were uprooted and the 
overflowing stream had turned the patio into a swamp. The greatest disaster had occurred 
in the kitchen. Wood fires had been built outdoors on bricks behind the house, and the 
cooks barely had time to rescue their pots from the rain. They lost precious time 
reorganizing the flooded kitchen and improvising new fires in the back gallery. But by 
one o’clock the crisis had been resolved and only the dessert was missing: the Sisters of 
St. Clare were in charge of that, and they had promised to send it before eleven. It was 
feared that the ditch along the King’s Highway had flooded, as it did even in less severe 
winters, and in that case it would be at least two hours before the dessert arrived. As soon 
as the weather cleared they opened the windows, and the house was cooled by air that 
had been purified by the sulfurous storm. Then the band was told to play its program of 
waltzes on the terrace of the portico, and that only heightened the confusion because 
everyone had to shout to be heard over the banging of copper pots inside the house. Tired 
of waiting, smiling even on the verge of tears, Aminta de Olivella ordered luncheon to be 
served. 

The group from the School of Fine Arts began their concert in the formal silence 
achieved for the opening bars of Mozart’s “La Chasse.” Despite the voices that grew 
louder and more confused and the intrusions of Don Sancho’s black servants, who could 
barely squeeze past the tables with their steaming serving dishes, Dr. Urbino managed to 
keep a channel open to the music until the program was over. His powers of 
concentration had decreased so much with the passing years that he had to write down 
each chess move in order to remember what he had planned. Yet he could still engage in 
serious conversation and follow a concert at the same time, although he never reached the 
masterful extremes of a German orchestra conductor, a great friend of his during his time 
in Austria, who read the score of Don Giovanni while listening to Tannhäuser. 

He thought that the second piece on the program, Schubert’s “Death and the Maiden,” 
was played with facile theatricality. While he strained to listen through the clatter of 
covered dishes, he stared at a blushing boy who nodded to him in greeting. He had seen 
him somewhere, no doubt about that, but he could not remember where. This often 
happened to him, above all with people’s names, even those he knew well, or with a 
melody from other times, and it caused him such dreadful anguish that one night he 
would have preferred to die rather than endure it until dawn. He was on the verge of 
reaching that state now when a charitable flash illuminated his memory: the boy had been 
one of his students last year. He was surprised to see him there, in the kingdom of the 
elect, but Dr. Olivella reminded him that he was the son of the Minister of Health and 
was preparing a thesis in forensic medicine. Dr. Juvenal Urbino greeted him with a joyful 
wave of his hand and the young doctor stood up and responded with a bow. But not then, 
not ever, did he realize that this was the intern who had been with him that morning in the 
house of Jeremiah de Saint-Amour. 

Comforted by yet another victory over old age, he surrendered to the diaphanous and 
fluid lyricism of the final piece on the program, which he could not identify. Later the 
young cellist, who had just returned from France, told him it was a quartet for strings by 
Gabriel Fauré, whom Dr. Urbino had not even heard of, although he was always very 


alert to the latest trends in Europe. Fermina Daza, who was keeping an eye on him as she 
always did, but most of all when she saw him becoming introspective in public, stopped 
eating and put her earthly hand on his. She said: “Don’t think about it anymore.” Dr. 
Urbino smiled at her from the far shore of ecstasy, and it was then that he began to think 
again about what she had feared. He remembered Jeremiah de Saint-Amour, on view at 
that hour in his coffin, in his bogus military uniform with his fake decorations, under the 
accusing eyes of the children in the portraits. He turned to the Archbishop to tell him 
about the suicide, but he had already heard the news. There had been a good deal of talk 
after High Mass, and he had even received a request from General Jerónimo Argote, on 
behalf of the Caribbean refugees, that he be buried in holy ground. He said: “The request 
itself, it seemed to me, showed a lack of respect.” Then, in a more humane tone, he asked 
if anyone knew the reason for the suicide. Dr. Urbino answered: “Gerontophobia,” the 
proper word although he thought he had just invented it. Dr. Olivella, attentive to the 
guests who were sitting closest to him, stopped listening to them for a moment to take 
part in his teacher’s conversation. He said: “It is a pity to still find a suicide that is not for 
love.” Dr. Urbino was not surprised to recognize his own thoughts in those of his favorite 
disciple. 

“And worse yet,” he said, “with gold cyanide.” 

When he said that, he once again felt compassion prevailing over the bitterness caused 
by the letter, for which he thanked not his wife but rather a miracle of the music. Then he 
spoke to the Archbishop of the lay saint he had known in their long twilights of chess, he 
spoke of the dedication of his art to the happiness of children, his rare erudition in all 
things of this world, his Spartan habits, and he himself was surprised by the purity of soul 
with which Jeremiah de Saint-Amour had separated himself once and for all from his 
past. Then he spoke to the Mayor about the advantages of purchasing his files of 
photographic plates in order to preserve the images of a generation who might never 
again be happy outside their portraits and in whose hands lay the future of the city. The 
Archbishop was scandalized that a militant and educated Catholic would dare to think 
that a suicide was saintly, but he agreed with the plan to create an archive of the 
negatives. The Mayor wanted to know from whom they were to be purchased. Dr. 
Urbino’s tongue burned with the live coal of the secret. “I will take care of it.” And he 
felt redeemed by his own loyalty to the woman he had repudiated five hours earlier. 
Fermina Daza noticed it and in a low voice made him promise that he would attend the 
funeral. Relieved, he said that of course he would, that went without saying. 

The speeches were brief and simple. The woodwind band began a popular tune that had 
not been announced on the program, and the guests strolled along the terraces, waiting for 
the men from Don Sancho’s Inn to finish drying the patio in case anyone felt inclined to 
dance. The only guests who stayed in the drawing room were those at the table of honor, 
who were celebrating the fact that Dr. Urbino had drunk half a glass of brandy in one 
swallow in a final toast. No one recalled that he had already done the same thing with a 
glass of grand cru wine as accompaniment to a very special dish, but his heart had 
demanded it of him that afternoon, and his self-indulgence was well repaid: once again, 
after so many long years, he felt like singing. And he would have, no doubt, on the urging 
of the young cellist who offered to accompany him, if one of those new automobiles had 
not suddenly driven across the mudhole of the patio, splashing the musicians and rousing 
the ducks in the barnyards with the quacking of its horn. It stopped in front of the portico 


and Dr. Marco Aurelio Urbino Daza and his wife emerged, laughing for all they were 
worth and carrying a tray covered with lace cloths in each hand. Other trays just like 
them were on the jump seats and even on the floor next to the chauffeur. It was the 
belated dessert. When the applause and the shouted cordial jokes had ended, Dr. Urbino 
Daza explained in all seriousness that before the storm broke, the Sisters of St. Clare had 
asked him to please bring the dessert, but he had left the King’s Highway because 
someone said that his parents’ house was on fire. Dr. Juvenal Urbino became upset before 
his son could finish the story, but his wife reminded him in time that he himself had 
called for the firemen to rescue the parrot. Aminta de Olivella was radiant as she decided 
to serve the dessert on the terraces even though they had already had their coffee. But Dr. 
Juvenal Urbino and his wife left without tasting it, for there was barely enough time for 
him to have his sacred siesta before the funeral. 

And he did have it, although his sleep was brief and restless because he discovered 
when he returned home that the firemen had caused almost as much damage as a fire. In 
their efforts to frighten the parrot they had stripped a tree with the pressure hoses, and a 
misdirected jet of water through the windows of the master bedroom had caused 
irreparable damage to the furniture and to the portraits of unknown forebears hanging on 
the walls. Thinking that there really was a fire, the neighbors had hurried over when they 
heard the bell on the fire truck, and if the disturbance was no worse, it was because the 
schools were closed on Sundays. When they realized they could not reach the parrot even 
with their extension ladders, the firemen began to chop at the branches with machetes, 
and only the opportune arrival of Dr. Urbino Daza prevented them from mutilating the 
tree all the way to the trunk. They left, saying they would return after five o’clock if they 
received permission to prune, and on their way out they muddied the interior terrace and 
the drawing room and ripped Fermina Daza’s favorite Turkish rug. Needless disasters, all 
of them, because the general impression was that the parrot had taken advantage of the 
chaos to escape through neighboring patios. And in fact Dr. Urbino looked for him in the 
foliage, but there was no response in any language, not even to whistles and songs, so he 
gave him up for lost and went to sleep when it was almost three o’clock. But first he 
enjoyed the immediate pleasure of smelling a secret garden in his urine that had been 
purified by lukewarm asparagus. 

He was awakened by sadness. Not the sadness he had felt that morning when he stood 
before the corpse of his friend, but the invisible cloud that would saturate his soul after 
his siesta and which he interpreted as divine notification that he was living his final 
afternoons. Until the age of fifty he had not been conscious of the size and weight and 
condition of his organs. Little by little, as he lay with his eyes closed after his daily siesta, 
he had begun to feel them, one by one, inside his body, feel the shape of his insomniac 
heart, his mysterious liver, his hermetic pancreas, and he had slowly discovered that even 
the oldest people were younger than he was and that he had become the only survivor of 
his generation’s legendary group portraits. When he became aware of his first bouts of 
forgetfulness, he had recourse to a tactic he had heard about from one of his teachers at 
the Medical School: “The man who has no memory makes one out of paper.” But this 
was a short-lived illusion, for he had reached the stage where he would forget what the 
written reminders in his pockets meant, search the entire house for the eyeglasses he was 
wearing, turn the key again after locking the doors, and lose the sense of what he was 
reading because he forgot the premise of the argument or the relationships among the 


characters. But what disturbed him most was his lack of confidence in his own power of 
reason: little by little, as in an ineluctable shipwreck, he felt himself losing his good 
judgment. 

With no scientific basis except his own experience, Dr. Juvenal Urbino knew that most 
fatal diseases had their own specific odor, but that none was as specific as old age. He 
detected it in the cadavers slit open from head to toe on the dissecting table, he even 
recognized it in patients who hid their age with the greatest success, he smelled it in the 
perspiration on his own clothing and in the unguarded breathing of his sleeping wife. If 
he had not been what he was--in essence an old-style Christian--perhaps he would have 
agreed with Jeremiah de Saint-Amour that old age was an indecent state that had to be 
ended before it was too late. The only consolation, even for someone like him who had 
been a good man in bed, was sexual peace: the slow, merciful extinction of his venereal 
appetite. At eighty-one years of age he had enough lucidity to realize that he was attached 
to this world by a few slender threads that could break painlessly with a simple change of 
position while he slept, and if he did all he could to keep those threads intact, it was 
because of his terror of not finding God in the darkness of death. 

Fermina Daza had been busy straightening the bedroom that had been destroyed by the 
firemen, and a little before four she sent for her husband’s daily glass of lemonade with 
chipped ice and reminded him that he should dress for the funeral. That afternoon Dr. 
Urbino had two books by his hand: Man, the Unknown by Alexis Carrel and The Story of 
San Michele by Axel Munthe; the pages of the second book were still uncut, and he asked 
Digna Pardo, the cook, to bring him the marble paper cutter he had left in the bedroom. 
But when it was brought to him he was already reading Man, the Unknown at the place he 
had marked with an envelope: there were only a few pages left till the end. He read 
slowly, making his way through the meanderings of a slight headache that he attributed to 
the half glass of brandy at the final toast. When he paused in his reading he sipped the 
lemonade or took his time chewing on a piece of ice. He was wearing his socks, and his 
shirt without its starched collar; his elastic suspenders with the green stripes hung down 
from his waist. The mere idea of having to change for the funeral irritated him. Soon he 
stopped reading, placed one book on top of the other, and began to rock very slowly in 
the wicker rocking chair, contemplating with regret the banana plants in the mire of the 
patio, the stripped mango, the flying ants that came after the rain, the ephemeral splendor 
of another afternoon that would never return. He had forgotten that he ever owned a 
parrot from Paramaribo whom he loved as if he were a human being, when suddenly he 
heard him say: “Royal parrot.” His voice sounded close by, almost next to him, and then 
he saw him in the lowest branch of the mango tree. 

“You scoundrel!” he shouted. 

The parrot answered in an identical voice: 

“You’re even more of a scoundrel, Doctor.” 

He continued to talk to him, keeping him in view while he put on his boots with great 
care so as not to frighten him and pulled his suspenders up over his arms and went down 
to the patio, which was still full of mud, testing the ground with his stick so that he would 
not trip on the three steps of the terrace. The parrot did not move, and perched so close to 
the ground that Dr. Urbino held out his walking stick for him so that he could sit on the 
silver handle, as was his custom, but the parrot sidestepped and jumped to the next 
branch, a little higher up but easier to reach since the house ladder had been leaning 


against it even before the arrival of the firemen. Dr. Urbino calculated the height and 
thought that if he climbed two rungs he would be able to catch him. He stepped onto the 
first, singing a disarming, friendly song to distract the attention of the churlish bird, who 
repeated the words without the music but sidled still farther out on the branch. He 
climbed to the second rung without difficulty, holding on to the ladder with both hands, 
and the parrot began to repeat the entire song without moving from the spot. He climbed 
to the third rung and then the fourth, for he had miscalculated the height of the branch, 
and then he grasped the ladder with his left hand and tried to seize the parrot with his 
right. Digna Pardo, the old servant, who was coming to remind him that he would be late 
for the funeral, saw the back of a man standing on the ladder, and she would not have 
believed that he was who he was if it had not been for the green stripes on the elastic 
suspenders. 

“Santísimo Sacramento!” she shrieked. “You’ll kill yourself!” 

Dr. Urbino caught the parrot around the neck with a triumphant sigh: ça y est. But he 
released him immediately because the ladder slipped from under his feet and for an 
instant he was suspended in air and then he realized that he had died without 
Communion, without time to repent of anything or to say goodbye to anyone, at seven 
minutes after four on Pentecost Sunday. 

Fermina Daza was in the kitchen tasting the soup for supper when she heard Digna 
Pardo’s horrified shriek and the shouting of the servants and then of the entire 
neighborhood. She dropped the tasting spoon and tried her best to run despite the 
invincible weight of her age, screaming like a madwoman without knowing yet what had 
happened under the mango leaves, and her heart jumped inside her ribs when she saw her 
man lying on his back in the mud, dead to this life but still resisting death’s final blow for 
one last minute so that she would have time to come to him. He recognized her despite 
the uproar, through his tears of unrepeatable sorrow at dying without her, and he looked 
at her for the last and final time with eyes more luminous, more grief-stricken, more 
grateful than she had ever seen them in half a century of a shared life, and he managed to 
say to her with his last breath: 

“Only God knows how much I loved you.” 

It was a memorable death, and not without reason. Soon after he had completed his 
course of specialized studies in France, Dr. Juvenal Urbino became known in his country 
for the drastic new methods he used to ward off the last cholera epidemic suffered by the 
province. While he was still in Europe, the previous one had caused the death of a quarter 
of the urban population in less than three months; among the victims was his father, who 
was also a highly esteemed physician. With his immediate prestige and a sizable 
contribution from his own inheritance, he founded the Medical Society, the first and for 
many years the only one in the Caribbean provinces, of which he was lifetime President. 
He organized the construction of the first aqueduct, the first sewer system, and the 
covered public market that permitted filth to be cleaned out of Las Ánimas Bay. He was 
also President of the Academy of the Language and the Academy of History. For his 
service to the Church, the Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem made him a Knight of the Order of 
the Holy Sepulcher, and the French Government conferred upon him the rank of 
Commander in the Legion of Honor. He gave active encouragement to every religious 
and civic society in the city and had a special interest in the Patriotic Junta, composed of 
politically disinterested influential citizens who urged governments and local businesses 


to adopt progressive ideas that were too daring for the time. The most memorable of them 
was the testing of an aerostatic balloon that on its inaugural flight carried a letter to San 
Juan de la Ciénaga, long before anyone had thought of airmail as a rational possibility. 
The Center for the Arts, which was also his idea, established the School of Fine Arts in 
the same house where it is still located, and for many years he was a patron of the Poetic 
Festival in April. 

Only he achieved what had seemed impossible for at least a century: the restoration of 
the Dramatic Theater, which had been used as a henhouse and a breeding farm for game 
cocks since colonial times. It was the culmination of a spectacular civic campaign that 
involved every sector of the city in a multitudinous mobilization that many thought 
worthy of a better cause. In any event, the new Dramatic Theater was inaugurated when it 
still lacked seats or lights, and the audience had to bring their own chairs and their own 
lighting for the intermissions. The same protocol held sway as at the great performances 
in Europe, and the ladies used the occasion to show off their long dresses and their fur 
coats in the dog days of the Caribbean summer, but it was also necessary to authorize the 
admission of servants to carry the chairs and lamps and all the things to eat that were 
deemed necessary to survive the interminable programs, one of which did not end until it 
was time for early Mass. The season opened with a French opera company whose novelty 
was a harp in the orchestra and whose unforgettable glory was the impeccable voice and 
dramatic talent of a Turkish soprano who sang barefoot and wore rings set with precious 
stones on her toes. After the first act the stage could barely be seen and the singers lost 
their voices because of the smoke from so many palm oil lamps, but the chroniclers of the 
city were very careful to delete these minor inconveniences and to magnify the 
memorable events. Without a doubt it was Dr. Urbino’s most contagious initiative, for 
opera fever infected the most surprising elements in the city and gave rise to a whole 
generation of Isoldes and Otellos and Aïdas and Siegfrieds. But it never reached the 
extremes Dr. Urbino had hoped for, which was to see Italianizers and Wagnerians 
confronting each other with sticks and canes during the intermissions. 

Dr. Juvenal Urbino never accepted the public positions that were offered to him with 
frequency and without conditions, and he was a pitiless critic of those physicians who 
used their professional prestige to attain political office. Although he was always 
considered a Liberal and was in the habit of voting for that party’s candidates, it was 
more a question of tradition than conviction, and he was perhaps the last member of the 
great families who still knelt in the street when the Archbishop’s carriage drove by. He 
defined himself as a natural pacifist, a partisan of definitive reconciliation between 
Liberals and Conservatives for the good of the nation. But his public conduct was so 
autonomous that no group claimed him for its own: the Liberals considered him a Gothic 
troglodyte, the Conservatives said he was almost a Mason, and the Masons repudiated 
him as a secret cleric in the service of the Holy See. His less savage critics thought he 
was just an aristocrat enraptured by the delights of the Poetic Festival while the nation 
bled to death in an endless civil war. 

Only two of his actions did not seem to conform to this image. The first was his 
leaving the former palace of the Marquis de Casalduero, which had been the family 
mansion for over a century, and moving to a new house in a neighborhood of nouveaux 
riches. The other was his marriage to a beauty from the lower classes, without name or 
fortune, whom the ladies with long last names ridiculed in secret until they were forced to 


admit that she outshone them all in distinction and character. Dr. Urbino was always 
acutely aware of these and many other cracks in his public image, and no one was as 
conscious as he of being the last to bear a family name on its way to extinction. His 
children were two undistinguished ends of a line. After fifty years, his son, Marco 
Aurelio, a doctor like himself and like all the family’s firstborn sons in every generation, 
had done nothing worthy of note--he had not even produced a child. Dr. Urbino’s only 
daughter, Ofelia, was married to a solid bank employee from New Orleans, and had 
reached the climacteric with three daughters and no son. But although stemming the flow 
of his blood into the tide of history caused him pain, what worried Dr. Urbino most about 
dying was the solitary life Fermina Daza would lead without him. 

In any event, the tragedy not only caused an uproar among his own household but 
spread to the common people as well. They thronged the streets in the hope of seeing 
something, even if it was only the brilliance of the legend. Three days of mourning were 
proclaimed, flags were flown at half mast in public buildings, and the bells in all the 
churches tolled without pause until the crypt in the family mausoleum was sealed. A 
group from the School of Fine Arts made a death mask that was to be used as the mold 
for a life-size bust, but the project was canceled because no one thought the faithful 
rendering of his final terror was decent. A reno wned artist who happened to be stopping 
here on his way to Europe painted, with pathos-laden realism, a gigantic canvas in which 
Dr. Urbino was depicted on the ladder at the fatal moment when he stretched out his hand 
to capture the parrot. The only element that contradicted the raw truth of the story was 
that in the painting he was wearing not the collarless shirt and the suspenders with green 
stripes, but rather a bowler hat and black frock coat copied from a rotogravure made 
during the years of the cholera epidemic. So that everyone would have the chance to see 
it, the painting was exhibited for a few months after the tragedy in the vast gallery of The 
Golden Wire, a shop that sold imported merchandise, and the entire city filed by. Then it 
was displayed on the walls of all the public and private institutions that felt obliged to pay 
tribute to the memory of their illustrious patron, and at last it was hung, after a second 
funeral, in the School of Fine Arts, where it was pulled down many years later by art 
students who burned it in the Plaza of the University as a symbol of an aesthetic and a 
time they despised. 

From her first moment as a widow, it was obvious that Fermina Daza was not as 
helpless as her husband had feared. She was adamant in her determination not to allow 
the body to be used for any cause, and she remained so even after the honorific telegram 
from the President of the Republic ordering it to lie in state for public viewing in the 
Assembly Chamber of the Provincial Government. With the same serenity she opposed a 
vigil in the Cathedral, which the Archbishop himself had requested, and she agreed to the 
body’s lying there only during the funeral Mass. Even after the mediation of her son, who 
was dumbfounded by so many different requests, Fermina Daza was firm in her rustic 
notion that the dead belong only to the family, and that the vigil would be kept at home, 
with mountain coffee and fritters and everyone free to weep for him in any way they 
chose. There would be no traditional nine-night wake: the doors were closed after the 
funeral and did not open again except for visits from intimate friends. 

The house was under the rule of death. Every object of value had been locked away 
with care for safekeeping, and on the bare walls there were only the outlines of the 
pictures that had been taken down. Chairs from the house, and those lent by the 


neighbors, were lined up against the walls from the drawing room to the bedrooms, and 
the empty spaces seemed immense and the voices had a ghostly resonance because the 
large pieces of furniture had been moved to one side, except for the concert piano which 
stood in its corner under a white sheet. In the middle of the library, on his father’s desk, 
what had once been Juvenal Urbino de la Calle was laid out with no coffin, with his final 
terror petrified on his face, and with the black cape and military sword of the Knights of 
the Holy Sepulcher. At his side, in complete mourning, tremulous, hardly moving, but 
very much in control of herself, Fermina Daza received condolences with no great 
display of feeling until eleven the following morning, when she bade farewell to her 
husband from the portico, waving goodbye with a handkerchief. 

It had not been easy for her to regain her self-control after she heard Digna Pardo’s 
shriek in the patio and found the old man of her life dying in the mud. Her first reaction 
was one of hope, because his eyes were open and shining with a radiant light she had 
never seen there before. She prayed to God to give him at least a moment so that he 
would not go without knowing how much she had loved him despite all their doubts, and 
she felt an irresistible longing to begin life with him over again so that they could say 
what they had left unsaid and do everything right that they had done badly in the past. 
But she had to give in to the intransigence of death. Her grief exploded into a blind rage 
against the world, even against herself, and that is what filled her with the control and the 
courage to face her solitude alone. From that time on she had no peace, but she was 
careful about any gesture that might seem to betray her grief. The only moment of pathos, 
although it was involuntary, occurred at eleven o’clock Sunday night when they brought 
in the episcopal coffin, still smelling of ship’s wax, with its copper handles and tufted silk 
lining. Dr. Urbino Daza ordered it closed without delay since the air in the house was 
already rarefied with the heady fragrance of so many flowers in the sweltering heat, and 
he thought he had seen the first purplish shadows on his father’s neck. An absent-minded 
voice was heard in the silence: “At that age you’re half decayed while you’re still alive.” 
Before they closed the coffin Fermina Daza took off her wedding ring and put it on her 
dead husband’s finger, and then she covered his hand with hers, as she always did when 
she caught him digressing in public. 

“We will see each other very soon,” she said to him. 

Florentino Ariza, unseen in the crowd of notable personages, felt a piercing pain in his 
side. Fermina Daza had not recognized him in the confusion of the first condolences, 
although no one would be more ready to serve or more useful during the night’s urgent 
business. It was he who imposed order in the crowded kitchens so that there would be 
enough coffee. He found additional chairs when the neighbors’ proved insufficient, and 
he ordered the extra wreaths to be put in the patio when there was no more room in the 
house. He made certain there was enough brandy for Dr. Lácides Olivella’s guests, who 
had heard the bad news at the height of the silver anniversary celebration and had rushed 
in to continue the party, sitting in a circle under the mango tree. He was the only one who 
knew how to react when the fugitive parrot appeared in the dining room at midnight with 
his head high and his wings spread, which caused a stupefied shudder to run through the 
house, for it seemed a sign of repentance. Florentino Ariza seized him by the neck before 
he had time to shout any of his witless stock phrases, and he carried him to the stable in a 
covered cage. He did everything this way, with so much discretion and such efficiency 
that it did not even occur to anyone that it might be an intrusion in other people’s affairs; 


on the contrary, it seemed a priceless service when evil times had fallen on the house. 

He was what he seemed: a useful and serious old man. His body was bony and erect, 
his skin dark and clean-shaven, his eyes avid behind round spectacles in silver frames, 
and he wore a romantic, old-fashioned mustache with waxed tips. He combed the last 
tufts of hair at his temples upward and plastered them with brilliantine to the middle of 
his shining skull as a solution to total baldness. His natural gallantry and languid manner 
were immediately charming, but they were also considered suspect virtues in a confirmed 
bachelor. He had spent a great deal of money, ingenuity, and willpower to disguise the 
seventy-six years he had completed in March, and he was convinced in the solitude of his 
soul that he had loved in silence for a much longer time than anyone else in this world 
ever had. 

The night of Dr. Urbino’s death, he was dressed just as he had been when he first heard 
the news, which was how he always dressed, even in the infernal heat of June: a dark suit 
with a vest, a silk bow tie and a celluloid collar, a felt hat, and a shiny black umbrella that 
he also used a walking stick. But when it began to grow light he left the vigil for two 
hours and returned as fresh as the rising sun, carefully shaven and fragrant with lotions 
from his dressing table. He had changed into a black frock coat of the kind worn only for 
funerals and the offices of Holy Week, a wing collar with an artist’s bow instead of a tie, 
and a bowler hat. He also carried his umbrella, not just out of habit but because he was 
certain that it would rain before noon, and he informed Dr. Urbino Daza of this in case 
the funeral could be held earlier. They tried to do so, in fact, because Florentino Ariza 
belonged to a shipping family and was himself President of the River Company of the 
Caribbean, which allowed one to suppose that he knew something about predicting the 
weather. But they could not alter the arrangements in time with the civil and military 
authorities, the public and private corporations, the military band, the School of Fine Arts 
orchestra, and the schools and religious fraternities, which were prepared for eleven 
o’clock, so the funeral that had been anticipated as a historic event turned into a rout because 
of a devastating downpour. Very few people splashed through the mud to the 
family mausoleum, protected by a colonial ceiba tree whose branches spread over the 
cemetery wall. On the previous afternoon, under those same branches but in the section 
on the other side of the wall reserved for suicides, the Caribbean refugees had buried 
Jeremiah de Saint-Amour with his dog beside him, as he had requested. 

Florentino Ariza was one of the few who stayed until the funeral was over. He was 
soaked to the skin and returned home terrified that he would catch pneumonia after so 
many years of meticulous care and excessive precautions. He prepared hot lemonade with 
a shot of brandy, drank it in bed with two aspirin tablets, and, wrapped in a wool blanket, 
sweated by the bucketful until the proper equilibrium had been reestablished in his body. 
When he returned to the wake he felt his vitality completely restored. Fermina Daza had 
once again assumed command of the house, which was cleaned and ready to receive 
visitors, and on the altar in the library she had placed a portrait in pastels of her dead 
husband, with a black border around the frame. By eight o’clock there were as many 
people and as intense a heat as the night before, but after the rosary someone circulated 
the request that everyone leave early so that the widow could rest for the first time since 
Sunday afternoon. 

Fermina Daza said goodbye to most of them at the altar, but she accompanied the last 
group of intimate friends to the street door so that she could lock it herself, as she had 


always done, as she was prepared to do with her final breath, when she saw Florentino 
Ariza, dressed in mourning and standing in the middle of the deserted drawing room. She 
was pleased, because for many years she had erased him from her life, and this was the 
first time she saw him clearly, purified by forgetfulness. But before she could thank him 
for the visit, he placed his hat over his heart, tremulous and dignified, and the abscess that 
had sustained his life finally burst. 

“Fermina,” he said, “I have waited for this opportunity for more than half a century, to 
repeat to you once again my vow of eternal fidelity and everlasting love.” 

Fermina Daza would have thought she was facing a madman if she had not had reason 
to believe that at that moment Florentino Ariza was inspired by the grace of the Holy 
Spirit. Her first impulse was to curse him for profaning the house when the body of her 
husband was still warm in the grave. But the dignity of her fury held her back. “Get out 
of here,” she said. “And don’t show your face again for the years of life that are left to 
you.” She opened the street door, which she had begun to close, and concluded: 

“And I hope there are very few of them.” 

When she heard his steps fade away in the deserted street she closed the door very 
slowly with the crossbar and the locks, and faced her destiny alone. Until that moment 
she had never been fully conscious of the weight and size of the drama that she had 
provoked when she was not yet eighteen, and that would pursue her until her death. She 
wept for the first time since the afternoon of the disaster, without witnesses, which was 
the only way she wept. She wept for the death of her husband, for her solitude and rage, 
and when she went into the empty bedroom she wept for herself because she had rarely 
slept alone in that bed since the loss of her virginity. Everything that belonged to her 
husband made her weep again: his tasseled slippers, his pajamas under the pillow, the 
space of his absence in the dressing table mirror, his own odor on her skin. A vague 
thought made her shudder: “The people one loves should take all their things with them 
when they die.” She did not want anyone’s help to get ready for bed, she did not want to 
eat anything before she went to sleep. Crushed by grief, she prayed to God to send her 
death that night while she slept, and with that hope she lay down, barefoot but fully 
dressed, and fell asleep on the spot. She slept without realizing it, but she knew in her 
sleep that she was still alive, and that she had half a bed to spare, that she was lying on 
her left side on the left-hand side of the bed as she always did, but that she missed the 
weight of the other body on the other side. Thinking as she slept, she tho ught that she 
would never again be able to sleep this way, and she began to sob in her sleep, and she 
slept, sobbing, without changing position on her side of the bed, until long after the 
roosters crowed and she was awakened by the despised sun of the morning without him. 
Only then did she realize that she had slept a long time without dying, sobbing in her 
sleep, and that while she slept, sobbing, she had thought more about Florentino Ariza 
than about her dead husband. 


CHAPTER TWO 

FLORENTINO ARIZA, on the other hand, had not stopped thinking of her for a single 
moment since Fermina Daza had rejected him out of hand after a long and troubled love 
affair fifty-one years, nine months, and four days ago. He did not have to keep a running 
tally, drawing a line for each day on the walls of a cell, because not a day had passed that 
something did not happen to remind him of her. At the time of their separation he lived 
with his mother, Tránsito Ariza, in one half of a rented house on the Street of Windows, 
where she had kept a notions shop ever since she was a young woman, and where she 
also unraveled shirts and old rags to sell as bandages for the men wounded in the war. He 
was her only child, born of an occasional alliance with the well-known shipowner Don 
Pius V Loayza, one of the three brothers who had founded the River Company of the 
Caribbean and thereby given new impetus to steam navigation along the Magdalena 
River. 

Don Pius V Loayza died when his son was ten years old. Although he always took care 
of his expenses in secret, he never recognized him as his son before the law, nor did he 
leave him with his future secure, so that Florentino Ariza used only his mother’s name 
even though his true parentage was always common knowledge. Florentino Ariza had to 
leave school after his father’s death, and he went to work as an apprentice in the Postal 
Agency, where he was in charge of opening sacks, sorting the letters, and notifying the 
public that mail had arrived by flying the flag of its country of origin over the office door. 

His good sense attracted the attention of the telegraph operator, the German émigré 
Lotario Thugut, who also played the organ for important ceremonies in the Cathedral and 
gave music lessons in the home. Lotario Thugut taught him the Morse code and the 
workings of the telegraph system, and after only a few lessons on the violin Florentino 
Ariza could play by ear like a professional. When he met Fermina Daza he was the most 
sought-after young man in his social circle, the one who knew how to dance the latest 
dances and recite sentimental poetry by heart, and who was always willing to play violin 
serenades to his friends’ sweethearts. He was very thin, with Indian hair plastered down 
with scented pomade and eyeglasses for myopia, which added to his forlorn appearance. 
Aside from his defective vision, he suffered from chronic constipation, which forced him 
to take enemas throughout his life. He had one black suit, inherited from his dead father, 
but Tránsito Ariza took such good care of it that every Sunday it looked new. Despite his 
air of weakness, his reserve, and his somber clothes, the girls in his circle held secret lotteries 
to determine who would spend time with him, and he gambled on spending time 
with them until the day he met Fermina Daza and his innocence came to an end. 

He had seen her for the first time one afternoon when Lotario Thugut told him to 
deliver a telegram to someone named Lorenzo Daza, with no known place of residence. 
He found him in one of the oldest houses on the Park of the Evangels; it was half in ruins, 
and its interior patio, with weeds in the flowerpots and a stone fountain with no water, 
resembled an abbey cloister. Florentino Ariza heard no human sound as he followed the 
barefoot maid under the arches of the passageway, where unopened moving cartons and 


bricklayer’s tools lay among leftover lime and stacks of cement bags, for the house was 
undergoing drastic renovation. At the far end of the patio was a temporary office where a 
very fat man, whose curly sideburns grew into his mustache, sat behind a desk, taking his 
siesta. In fact his name was Lorenzo Daza, and he was not very well known in the city 
because he had arrived less than two years before and was not a man with many friends. 

He received the telegram as if it were the continuation of an ominous dream. Florentino 
Ariza observed his livid eyes with a kind of official compassion, he observed his 
uncertain fingers trying to break the seal, the heartfelt fear that he had seen so many times 
in so many addressees who still could not think about telegrams without connecting them 
with death. After reading it he regained his composure. He sighed: “Good news.” And he 
handed Florentino Ariza the obligatory five reales, letting him know with a relieved smile 
that he would not have given them to him if the news had been bad. Then he said 
goodbye with a handshake, which was not the usual thing to do with a telegraph 
messenger, and the maid accompanied him to the street door, more to keep an eye on him 
than to lead the way. They retraced their steps along the arcaded passageway, but this 
time Florentino Ariza knew that there was someone else in the house, because the 
brightness in the patio was filled with the voice of a woman repeating a reading lesson. 
As he passed the sewing room, he saw through the window an older woman and a young 
girl sitting very close together on two chairs and following the reading in the book that 
the woman held open on her lap. It seemed a strange sight: the daughter teaching the 
mother to read. His interpretation was incorrect only in part, because the woman was the 
aunt, not the mother of the child, although she had raised her as if she were her own. The 
lesson was not interrupted, but the girl raised her eyes to see who was passing by the 
window, and that casual glance was the beginning of a cataclysm of love that still had not 
ended half a century later. 

All that Florentino Ariza could learn about Lorenzo Daza was that he had come from 
San Juan de la Ciénaga with his only daughter and his unmarried sister soon after the 
cholera epidemic, and those who saw him disembark had no doubt that he had come to 
stay since he brought everything necessary for a well-furnished house. His wife had died 
when the girl was very young. His sister, named Escolástica, was forty years old, and she 
was fulfilling a vow to wear the habit of St. Francis when she went out on the street and 
the penitent’s rope around her waist when she was at home. The girl was thirteen years 
old and had the same name as her dead mother: Fermina. 

It was supposed that Lorenzo Daza was a man of means, because he lived well with no 
known employment and had paid hard cash for the Park of the Evangels house, whose 
restoration must have cost him at least twice the purchase price of two hundred go ld 
pesos. His daughter was studying at the Academy of the Presentation of the Blessed 
Virgin, where for two centuries young ladies of society had learned the art and technique 
of being diligent and submissive wives. During the colonial period and the early years of 
the Republic, the school had accepted only those students with great family names. But 
the old families, ruined by Independence, had to submit to the realities of a new time, and 
the Academy opened its doors to all applicants who could pay the tuition, regardless of 
the color of their blood, on the essential condition that they were legitimate daughters of 
Catholic marriages. In any event, it was an expensive school, and the fact that Fermina 
Daza studied there was sufficient indication of her family’s economic situation, if not of 
its social position. This news encouraged Florentino Ariza, since it indicated to him that 


the beautiful adolescent with the almond-shaped eyes was within reach of his dreams. But 
her father’s strict regime soon provided an irremediable difficulty. Unlike the other 
students, who walked to school in groups or accompanied by an older servant, Fermina 
Daza always walked with her spinster aunt, and her behavior indicated that she was permitted 
no distraction. 

It was in this innocent way that Florentino Ariza began his secret life as a solitary 
hunter. From seven o’clock in the morning, he sat on the most hidden bench in the little 
park, pretending to read a book of verse in the shade of the almond trees, until he saw the 
impossible maiden walk by in her blue-striped uniform, stockings that reached to her 
knees, masculine laced oxfords, and a single thick braid with a bow at the end, which 
hung down her back to her waist. She walked with natural haughtiness, her head high, her 
eyes unmoving, her step rapid, her nose pointing straight ahead, her bag of books held 
against her chest with crossed arms, her doe’s gait making her seem immune to gravity. 
At her side, struggling to keep up with her, the aunt with the brown habit and rope of St. 
Francis did not allow him the slightest opportunity to approach. Florentino Ariza saw 
them pass back and forth four times a day and once on Sundays when they came out of 
High Mass, and just seeing the girl was enough for him. Little by little he idealized her, 
endowing her with improbable virtues and imaginary sentiments, and after two weeks he 
thought of nothing else but her. So he decided to send Fermina Daza a simple note 
written on both sides of the paper in his exquisite notary’s hand. But he kept it in his 
pocket for several days, thinking about how to hand it to her, and while he thought he 
wrote several more pages before going to bed, so that the original letter was turning into a 
dictionary of compliments, inspired by books he had learned by heart because he read 
them so often during his vigils in the park. 

Searching for a way to give her the letter, he tried to make the acquaintance of some of 
the other students at Presentation Academy, but they were too distant from his world. 
Besides, after much thought, it did not seem prudent to let anyone else know of his 
intentions. Still, he managed to find out that Fermina Daza had been invited to a Saturday 
dance a few days after their arrival in the city, and her father had not allowed her to go, 
with a conclusive: “Everything in due course.” By the time the letter contained more than 
sixty pages written on both sides, Florentino Ariza could no longer endure the weight of 
his secret, and he unburdened himself to his mother, the only person with whom he 
allowed himself any confidences. Tránsito Ariza was moved to tears by her son’s 
innocence in matters of love, and she tried to guide him with her own knowledge. She 
began by convincing him not to deliver the lyrical sheaf of papers, since it would only 
frighten the girl of his dreams, who she supposed was as green as he in matters of the 
heart. The first step, she said, was to make her aware of his interest so that his declaration 
would not take her so much by surprise and she would have time to think. 

“But above all,” she said, “the first person you have to win over is not the girl but her 
aunt.” 

Both pieces of advice were wise, no doubt, but they came too late. In reality, on the day 
when Fermina Daza let her mind wander for an instant from the reading lesson she was 
giving her aunt and raised her eyes to see who was walking along the passageway, 
Florentino Ariza had impressed her because of his air of vulnerability. That night, during 
supper, her father had mentioned the telegram, which was how she found out why 
Florentino Ariza had come to the house and what he did for a living. This information 


increased her interest, because for her, as for so many other people at that time, the 
invention of the telegraph had something magical about it. So that she recognized 
Florentino Ariza the first time she saw him reading under the trees in the little park, 
although it in no way disquieted her until her aunt told her he had been there for several 
weeks. Then, when they also saw him on Sundays as they came out of Mass, her aunt was 
convinced that all these meetings could not be casual. She said: “He is not going to all 
this trouble for me.” For despite her austere conduct and penitential habit, Aunt 
Escolástica had an instinct for life and a vocation for complicity, which were her greatest 
virtues, and the mere idea that a man was interested in her niece awakened an irresistible 
emotion in her. Fermina Daza, however, was still safe from even simple curiosity about 
love, and the only feeling that Florentino Ariza inspired in her was a certain pity, because 
it seemed to her that he was sick. But her aunt told her that one had to live a long time to 
know a man’s true nature, and she was convinced that the one who sat in the park to 
watch them walk by could only be sick with love. 

Aunt Escolástica was a refuge of understanding and affection for the only child of a 
loveless marriage. She had raised her since the death of her mother, and in her relations 
with Lorenzo Daza she behaved more like an accomplice than an aunt. So that the 
appearance of Florentino Ariza was for them another of the many intimate diversions 
they invented to pass the time. Four times a day, when they walked through the little Park 
of the Evangels, both hurried to look with a rapid glance at the thin, timid, unimpressive 
sentinel who was almost always dressed in black despite the heat and who pretended to 
read under the trees. “There he is,” said the one who saw him first, suppressing her 
laughter, before he raised his eyes and saw the two rigid, aloof women of his life as they 
crossed the park without looking at him. 

“Poor thing,” her aunt had said. “He does not dare approach you because I am with 
you, but one day he will if his intentions are serious, and then he will give you a letter.” 

Foreseeing all kinds of adversities, she taught her to communicate in sign language, an 
indispensable strategy in forbidden love. These unexpected, almost childish antics caused 
an unfamiliar curiosity in Fermina Daza, but for several months it did not occur to her 
that it could go any further. She never knew when the diversion became a preoccupation 
and her blood frothed with the need to see him, and one night she awoke in terror because 
she saw him looking at her from the darkness at the foot of her bed. Then she longed with 
all her soul for her aunt’s predictions to come true, and in her prayers she begged God to 
give him the courage to hand her the letter just so she could know what it said. 

But her prayers were not answered. On the contrary. This occurred at the time that 
Florentino Ariza made his confession to his mother, who dissuaded him from handing 
Fermina Daza his seventy pages of compliments, so that she continued to wait for the rest 
of the year. Her preoccupation turned into despair as the December vacation approached, 
and she asked herself over and over again how she would see him and let him see her 
during the three months when she would not be walking to school. Her doubts were still 
unresolved on Christmas Eve, when she was shaken by the presentiment that he was in 
the crowd at Midnight Mass, looking at her, and this uneasiness flooded her heart. She 
did not dare to turn her head, because she was sitting between her father and her aunt, and 
she had to control herself so that they would not notice her agitation. But in the crowd 
leaving the church she felt him so close, so clearly, that an irresistible power forced her to 
look over her shoulder as she walked along the central nave and then, a hand’s breadth 


from her eyes, she saw those icy eyes, that livid face, those lips petrified by the terror of 
love. Dismayed by her own audacity, she seized Aunt Escolástica’s arm so she would not 
fall, and her aunt felt the icy perspiration on her hand through the lace mitt, and she 
comforted her with an imperceptible sign of unconditional complicity. In the din of 
fireworks and native drums, of colored lights in the doorways and the clamor of the 
crowd yearning for peace, Florentino Ariza wandered like a sleepwalker until dawn, 
watching the fiesta through his tears, dazed by the hallucination that it was he and not 
God who had been born that night. 

His delirium increased the following week, when he passed Fermina Daza’s house in 
despair at the siesta hour and saw that she and her aunt were sitting under the almond 
trees at the doorway. It was an open-air repetition of the scene he had witnessed the first 
afternoon in the sewing room: the girl giving a reading lesson to her aunt. But Fermina 
Daza seemed different without the school uniform, for she wore a narrow tunic with 
many folds that fell from her shoulders in the Greek style, and on her head she wore a 
garland of fresh gardenias that made her look like a crowned goddess. Florentino Ariza 
sat in the park where he was sure he would be seen, and then he did not have recourse to 
his feigned reading but sat with the book open and his eyes fixed on the illusory maiden, 
who did not even respond with a charitable glance. 

At first he thought that the lesson under the almond trees was a casual innovation due, 
perhaps, to the interminable repairs on the house, but in the days that followed he came to 
understand that Fermina Daza would be there, within view, every afternoon at the same 
time during the three months of vacation, and that certainty filled him with new hope. He 
did not have the impression that he was seen, he could not detect any sign of interest or 
rejection, but in her indifference there was a distinct radiance that encouraged him to 
persevere. Then, one afternoon toward the end of January, the aunt put her work on the 
chair and left her niece alone in the doorway under the shower of yellow leaves falling 
from the almond trees. Encouraged by the impetuous thought that this was an arranged 
opportunity, Florentino Ariza crossed the street and stopped in front of Fermina Daza, so 
close to her that he could detect the catches in her breathing and the floral scent that he 
would identify with her for the rest of his life. He spoke with his head high and with a 
determination that would be his again only half a century later, and for the same reason. 

“All I ask is that you accept a letter from me,” he said. 

It was not the voice that Fermina Daza had expected from him: it was sharp and clear, 
with a control that had nothing to do with his languid manner. Without lifting her eyes 
from her embroidery, she replied: “I cannot accept it without my father’s permission.” 
Florentino Ariza shuddered at the warmth of that voice, whose hushed tones he was not 
to forget for the rest of his life. But he held himself steady and replied without hesitation: 
“Get it.” Then he sweetened the command with a plea: “It is a matter of life and death.” 
Fermina Daza did not look at him, she did not interrupt her embroidering, but her 
decision opened the door a crack, wide enough for the entire world to pass through. 

“Come back every afternoon,” she said to him, “and wait until I change my seat.” 

Florentino Ariza did not understand what she meant until the following Monday when, 
from the bench in the little park, he saw the same scene with one variation: when Aunt 
Escolástica went into the house, Fermina Daza stood up and then sat in the other chair. 
Florentino Ariza, with a white camellia in his lapel, crossed the street and stood in front 
of her. He said: “This is the greatest moment of my life.” Fermina Daza did not raise her 


eyes to him, but she looked all around her and saw the deserted streets in the heat of the 

dry season and a swirl of dead leaves pulled along by the wind. 

“Give it to me,” she said. 

Florentino Ariza had intended to give her the seventy sheets he could recite from 
memory after reading them so often, but then he decided on a sober and explicit half page 
in which he promised only what was essential: his perfect fidelity and his everlasting 
love. He took the letter out of his inside jacket pocket and held it before the eyes of the 
troubled embroiderer, who had still not dared to look at him. She saw the blue envelope 
trembling in a hand petrified with terror, and she raised the embroidery frame so he could 
put the letter on it, for she could not admit that she had noticed the trembling of his 
fingers. Then it happened: a bird shook himself among the leaves of the almond trees, 
and his droppings fell right on the embroidery. Fermina Daza moved the frame out of the 
way, hid it behind the chair so that he would not notice what had happened, and looked at 
him for the first time, her face aflame. Florentino Ariza was impassive as he held the 
letter in his hand and said: “It’s good luck.” She thanked him with her first smile and 
almost snatched the letter away from him, folded it, and hid it in her bodice. Then he 
offered her the camellia he wore in his lapel. She refused: “It is a flower of promises.” 
Then, conscious that their time was almost over, she again took refuge in her composure. 

“Now go,” she said, “and don’t come back until I tell you to.” 

After Florentino Ariza saw her for the first time, his mother knew before he told her 
because he lost his voice and his appetite and spent the entire night tossing and turning in 
his bed. But when he began to wait for the answer to his first letter, his anguish was 
complicated by diarrhea and green vomit, he became disoriented and suffered from 
sudden fainting spells, and his mother was terrified because his condition did not 
resemble the turmoil of love so much as the devastation of cholera. Florentino Ariza’s 
godfather, an old homeopathic practitioner who had been Tránsito Ariza’s confidant ever 
since her days as a secret mistress, was also alarmed at first by the patient’s condition, 
because he had the weak pulse, the hoarse breathing, and the pale perspiration of a dying 
man. But his examination revealed that he had no fever, no pain anywhere, and that his 
only concrete feeling was an urgent desire to die. All that was needed was shrewd 
questioning, first of the patient and then of his mother, to conclude once again that the 
symptoms of love were the same as those of cholera. He prescribed infusions of linden 
blossoms to calm the nerves and suggested a change of air so he could find consolation in 
distance, but Florentino Ariza longed for just the opposite: to enjoy his martyrdom. 

Tránsito Ariza was a freed quadroon whose instinct for happiness had been frustrated 
by poverty, and she took pleasure in her son’s suffering as if it were her own. She made 
him drink the infusions when he became delirious, and she smothered him in wool 
blankets to keep away the chills, but at the same time she encouraged him to enjoy his 
prostration. 

“Take advantage of it now, while you are young, and suffer all you can,” she said to 
him, “because these things don’t last your whole life.” 

In the Postal Agency, of course, they did not agree. Florentino Ariza had become 
negligent, and he was so distracted that he confused the flags that announced the arrival 
of the mail, and one Wednesday he hoisted the German flag when the ship was from the 
Leyland Company and carried the mail from Liverpool, and on another day he flew the 
flag of the United States when the ship was from the Compagnie Générale 


Transatlantique and carried the mail from Saint-Nazaire. These confusions of love caused 
such chaos in the distribution of the mail and provoked so many protests from the public 
that if Florentino Ariza did not lose his job it was because Lotario Thugut kept him at the 
telegraph and took him to play the violin in the Cathedral choir. They had a friendship 
difficult to understand because of the difference in their ages, for they might have been 
grandfather and grandson, but they got along at work as well as they did in the taverns 
around the port, which were frequented by everyone out for the evening regardless of 
social class, from drunken beggars to young gentlemen in tuxedos who fled the gala 
parties at the Social Club to eat fried mullet and coconut rice. Lotario Thugut was in the 
habit of going there after the last shift at the telegraph office, and dawn often found him 
drinking Jamaican punch and playing the accordion with the crews of madmen from the 
Antillean schooners. He was corpulent and bull-necked, with a golden beard and a liberty 
cap that he wore when he went out at night, and all he needed was a string of bells to look 
like St. Nicholas. At least once a week he ended the evening with a little night bird, as he 
called them, one of the many who sold emergency love in a transient hotel for sailors. 
When he met Florentino Ariza, the first thing he did, with a certain magisterial delight, 
was to initiate him into the secrets of his paradise. He chose for him the little birds he 
thought best, he discussed their price and style with them and offered to pay in advance 
with his own money for their services. But Florentino Ariza did not accept: he was a 
virgin, and he had decided not to lose his virginity unless it was for love. 

The hotel was a colonial palace that had seen better days, and its great marble salons 
and rooms were divided into plasterboard cubicles with peepholes, which were rented out 
as much for watching as for doing. There was talk of busybodies who had their eyes 
poked out with knitting needles, of a man who recognized his own wife as the woman he 
was spying on, of well-bred gentlemen who came disguised as tarts to forget who they 
were with the boatswains on shore leave, and of so many other misadventures of 
observers and observed that the mere idea of going into the next room terrified Florentino 
Ariza. And so Lotario Thugut could never persuade him that watching and letting himself 
be watched were the refinements of European princes. 

As opposed to what his corpulence might suggest, Lotario Thugut had the rosebud 
genitals of a cherub, but this must have been a fortunate defect, because the most 
tarnished birds argued over who would have the chance to go to bed with him, and then 
they shrieked as if their throats were being cut, shaking the buttresses of the palace and 
making its ghosts tremble in fear. They said he used an ointment made of snake venom 
that inflamed women’s loins, but he swore he had no resources other than those that God 
had given him. He would say with uproarious laughter: “It’s pure love.” Many years had 
to pass before Florentino Ariza would understand that perhaps he was right. He was 
convinced at last, at a more advanced stage of his sentimental education, when he met a 
man who lived like a king by exploiting three women at the same time. The three of them 
rendered their accounts at dawn, prostrate at his feet to beg forgiveness for their meager 
profits, and the only gratification they sought was that he go to bed with the one who 
brought him the most money. Florentino Ariza thought that terror alone could induce 
such indignities, but one of the three girls surprised him with the contradictory truth. 

“These are things,” she said, “you do only for love.” 

It was not so much for his talents as a fornicator as for his personal charm that Lotario 
Thugut had become one of the most esteemed clients of the hotel. Florentino Ariza, 


because he was so quiet and elusive, also earned the esteem of the owner, and during the 
most arduous period of his grief he would lock himself in the suffocating little rooms to 
read verses and tearful serialized love stories, and his reveries left nests of dark swallows 
on the balconies and the sound of kisses and the beating of wings in the stillness of siesta. 
At dusk, when it was cooler, it was impossible not to listen to the conversations of men 
who came to console themselves at the end of their day with hurried love. So that 
Florentino Ariza heard about many acts of disloyalty, and even some state secrets, which 
important clients and even local officials confided to their ephemeral lovers, not caring if 
they could be overheard in the adjoining rooms. This was also how he learned that four 
nautical leagues to the north of the Sotavento Archipelago, a Spanish galleon had been 
lying under water since the eighteenth century with its cargo of more than five hundred 
billion pesos in pure gold and precious stones. The story astounded him, but he did not 
think of it again until a few months later, when his love awakened in him an 
overwhelming desire to salvage the sunken treasure so that Fermina Daza could bathe in 
showers of gold. 

Years later, when he tried to remember what the maiden idealized by the alchemy of 
poetry really was like, he could not distinguish her from the heartrending twilights of 
those times. Even when he observed her, unseen, during those days of longing when he 
waited for a reply to his first letter, he saw her transfigured in the afternoon shimmer of 
two o’clock in a shower of blossoms from the almond trees where it was always April 
regardless of the season of the year. The only reason he was interested in accompanying 
Lotario Thugut on his violin from the privileged vantage point in the choir was to see 
how her tunic fluttered in the breeze raised by the canticles. But his own delirium finally 
interfered with that pleasure, for the mystic music seemed so innocuous compared with 
the state of his soul that he attempted to make it more exciting with love waltzes, and 
Lotario Thugut found himself obliged to ask that he leave the choir. This was the time 
when he gave in to his desire to eat the gardenias that Tránsito Ariza grew in pots in the 
patio, so that he could know the taste of Fermina Daza. It was also the time when he 
happened to find in one of his mother’s trunks a liter bottle of the cologne that the sailors 
from the Hamburg-American Line sold as contraband, and he could not resist the 
temptation to sample it in order to discover other tastes of his beloved. He continued to 
drink from the bottle until dawn, and he became drunk on Fermina Daza in abrasive 
swallows, first in the taverns around the port and then as he stared out to sea from the 
jetties where lovers without a roof over their heads made consoling love, until at last he 
succumbed to unconsciousness. Tránsito Ariza, who had waited for him until six o’clock 
in the morning with her heart in her mouth, searched for him in the most improbable 
hiding places, and a short while after noon she found him wallowing in a pool of fragrant 
vomit in a cove of the bay where drowning victims washed ashore. 

She took advantage of the hiatus of his convalescence to reproach him for his passivity 
as he waited for the answer to his letter. She reminded him that the weak would never 
enter the kingdom of love, which is a harsh and ungenerous kingdom, and that women 
give themselves only to men of resolute spirit, who provide the security they need in 
order to face life. Florentino Ariza learned the lesson, perhaps too well. Tránsito Ariza 
could not hide a feeling of pride, more carnal than maternal, when she saw him leave the 
notions shop in his black suit and stiff felt hat, his lyrical bow tie and celluloid collar, and 
she asked him as a joke if he was going to a funeral. He answered, his ears flaming: “It’s 


almost the same thing.” She realized that he could hardly breathe with fear, but his 
determination was invincible. She gave him her final warnings and her blessing, and 
laughing for all she was worth, she promised him another bottle of cologne so they could 
celebrate his victory together. 

He had given Fermina Daza the letter a month before, and since then he had often 
broken his promise not to return to the little park, but he had been very careful not to be 
seen. Nothing had changed. The reading lesson under the trees ended at about two 
o’clock, when the city was waking from its siesta, and Fermina Daza embroidered with 
her aunt until the day began to cool. Florentino Ariza did not wait for the aunt to go into 
the house, and he crossed the street with a martial stride that allowed him to overcome 
the weakness in his knees, but he spoke to her aunt, not to Fermina Daza. 

“Please be so kind as to leave me alone for a moment with the young lady,” he said. “I 
have something important to tell her.” 

“What impertinence!” her aunt said to him. “There is nothing that has to do with her 
that I cannot hear.” 

“Then I will not say anything to her,” he said, “but I warn you that you will be 
responsible for the consequences.” 

That was not the manner Escolástica Daza expected from the ideal sweetheart, but she 
stood up in alarm because for the first time she had the overwhelming impression that 
Florentino Ariza was speaking under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. So she went into 
the house to change needles and left the two young people alone under the almond trees 
in the doorway. 

In reality, Fermina Daza knew very little about this taciturn suitor who had appeared in 
her life like a winter swallow and whose name she would not even have known if it had 
not been for his signature on the letter. She had learned that he was the fatherless son of 
an unmarried woman who was hardworking and serious but forever marked by the fiery 
stigma of her single youthful mistake. She had learned that he was not a messenger, as 
she had supposed, but a well-qualified assistant with a promising future, and she thought 
that he had delivered the telegram to her father only as a pretext for seeing her. This idea 
moved her. She also knew that he was one of the musicians in the choir, and although she 
never dared raise her eyes to look at him during Mass, she had the revelation one Sunday 
that while the other instruments played for everyone, the violin played for her alone. He 
was not the kind of man she would have chosen. His found ling’s eyeglasses, his clerical 
garb, his mysterious resources had awakened in her a curiosity that was difficult to resist, 
but she had never imagined that curiosity was one of the many masks of love. 

She herself could not explain why she had accepted the letter. She did not reproach 
herself for doing so, but the ever-increasing pressure to respond complicated her life. Her 
father’s every word, his casual glances, his most trivial gestures, seemed set with traps to 
uncover her secret. Her state of alarm was such that she avoided speaking at the table for 
fear some slip might betray her, and she became evasive even with her Aunt Escolástica, 
who nonetheless shared her repressed anxiety as if it were her own. She would lock 
herself in the bathroom at odd hours and for no reason other than to reread the letter, 
attempting to discover a secret code, a magic formula hidden in one of the three hundred 
fourteen letters of its fifty-eight words, in the hope they would tell her more than they 
said. But all she found was what she had understood on first reading, when she ran to 
lock herself in the bathroom, her heart in a frenzy, and tore open the envelope hoping for 


a long, feverish letter, and found only a perfumed note whose determination frightened 
her. 

At first she had not even thought seriously that she was obliged to respond, but the 
letter was so explicit that there was no way to avoid it. Meanwhile, in the torment of her 
doubts, she was surprised to find herself thinking about Florentino Ariza with more 
frequency and interest than she cared to allow, and she even asked herself in great 
distress why he was not in the little park at the usual hour, forgetting that it was she who 
had asked him not to return while she was preparing her reply. And so she thought about 
him as she never could have imagined thinking about anyone, having premonitions that 
he would be where he was not, wanting him to be where he could not be, awaking with a 
start, with the physical sensation that he was looking at her in the darkness while she 
slept, so that on the afternoon when she heard his resolute steps on the yellow leaves in 
the little park it was difficult for her not to think this was yet another trick of her imagination. 
But when he demanded her answer with an authority that was so different from his 
languor, she managed to overcome her fear and tried to dodge the issue with the truth: 
she did not know how to answer him. But Florentino Ariza had not leapt across an abyss 
only to be shooed away with such excuses. 

“If you accepted the letter,” he said to her, “it shows a lack of courtesy not to answer 
it.” 

That was the end of the labyrinth. Fermina Daza regained her self-control, begged his 
pardon for the delay, and gave him her solemn word that he would have an answer before 
the end of the vacation. And he did. On the last Friday in February, three days before 
school reopened, Aunt Escolástica went to the telegraph office to ask how much it cost to 
send a telegram to Piedras de Moler, a village that did not even appear on the list of 
places served by the telegraph, and she allowed Florentino Ariza to attend her as if she 
had never seen him before, but when she left she pretended to forget a breviary covered 
in lizard skin, leaving it on the counter, and in it there was an envelope made of linen 
paper with golden vignettes. Delirious with joy, Florentino Ariza spent the rest of the 
afternoon eating roses and reading the note letter by letter, over and over again, and the 
more he read the more roses he ate, and by midnight he had read it so many times and 
had eaten so many roses that his mother had to hold his head as if he were a calf and 
force him to swallow a dose of castor oil. 

It was the year they fell into devastating love. Neither one could do anything except 
think about the other, dream about the other, and wait for letters with the same 
impatience they felt when they answered them. Never in that delirious spring, or in the 
following year, did they have the opportunity to speak to each other. Moreover, from the 
moment they saw each other for the first time until he reiterated his determination a half 
century later, they never had the opportunity to be alone or to talk of their love. But 
during the first three months not one day went by that they did not write to each other, 
and for a time they wrote twice a day, until Aunt Escolástica became frightened by the 
intensity of the blaze that she herself had helped to ignite. 

After the first letter that she carried to the telegraph office with an ember of revenge 
against her own destiny, she had allowed an almost daily exchange of messages in what 
appeared to be casual encounters on the street, but she did not have the courage to permit 
a conversation, no matter how banal and fleeting it might be. Still, after three months she 
realized that her niece was not the victim of a girlish fancy, as it had seemed at first, and 


that her own life was threatened by the fire of love. The truth was that Escolástica Daza 
had no other means of support except her brother’s charity, and she knew that his 
tyrannical nature would never forgive such a betrayal of his confidence. But when it was 
time for the final decision, she did not have the heart to cause her niece the same 
irreparable grief that she had been obliged to nurture ever since her youth, and she 
permitted her to use a strategy that allowed her the illusion of innocence. The method was 
simple: Fermina Daza would leave her letter in some hiding place along her daily route 
from the house to the Academy, and in that letter she would indicate to Florentino Ariza 
where she expected to find his answer. Florentino Ariza did the same. In this way, for the 
rest of the year, the conflicts in Aunt Escolástica’s conscience were transferred to 
baptisteries in churches, holes in trees, and crannies in ruined colonial fortresses. 
Sometimes their letters were soaked by rain, soiled by mud, torn by adversity, and some 
were lost for a variety of other reasons, but they always found a way to be in touch with 
each other again. 

Florentino Ariza wrote every night. Letter by letter, he had no mercy as he poisoned 
himself with the smoke from the palm oil lamps in the back room of the notions shop, 
and his letters became more discursive and more lunatic the more he tried to imitate his 
favorite poets from the Popular Library, which even at that time was approaching eighty 
volumes. His mother, who had urged him with so much fervor to enjoy his torment, 
became concerned for his health. “You are going to wear out your brains,” she shouted at 
him from the bedroom when she heard the first roosters crow. “No woman is worth all 
that.” She could not remember ever having known anyone in such a state of unbridled 
passion. But he paid no attention to her. Sometimes he went to the office without having 
slept, his hair in an uproar of love after leaving the letter in the prearranged hiding place 
so that Fermina Daza would find it on her way to school. She, on the other hand, under 
the watchful eye of her father and the vicious spying of the nuns, could barely manage to 
fill half a page from her notebook when she locked herself in the bathroom or pretended 
to take notes in class. But this was not only due to her limited time and the danger of 
being taken by surprise, it was also her nature that caused her letters to avoid emotional 
pitfalls and confine themselves to relating the events of her daily life in the utilitarian 
style of a ship’s log. In reality they were distracted letters, intended to keep the coals 
alive without putting her hand in the fire, while Florentino Ariza burned himself alive in 
every line. Desperate to infect her with his own madness, he sent her miniaturist’s verses 
inscribed with the point of a pin on camellia petals. It was he, not she, who had the 
audacity to enclose a lock of his hair in one letter, but he never received the response he 
longed for, which was an entire strand of Fermina Daza’s braid. He did move her at last 
to take one step further, and from that time on she began to send him the veins of leaves 
dried in dictionaries, the wings of butterflies, the feathers of magic birds, and for his 
birthday she gave him a square centimeter of St. Peter Clavier’s habit, which in those 
days was being sold in secret at a price far beyond the reach of a schoolgirl her age. One 
night, without any warning, Fermina Daza awoke with a start: a solo violin was serenading 
her, playing the same waltz over and over again. She shuddered when she realized 
that each note was an act of thanksgiving for the petals from her herbarium, for the 
moments stolen from arithmetic to write her letters, for her fear of examinations when 
she was thinking more about him than about the natural sciences, but she did not dare 
believe that Florentino Ariza was capable of such imprudence. 


The next morning at breakfast Lorenzo Daza could not contain his curiosity--first 
because he did not know what playing a single piece meant in the language of serenades, 
and second because, despite the attention with which he had listened, he could not 
determine which house it had been intended for. Aunt Escolástica, with a sangfroid that 
took her niece’s breath away, stated that she had seen through the bedroom curtains that 
the solitary violinist was standing on the other side of the park, and she said that in any 
event a single piece was notification of severed relations. In that day’s letter Florentino 
Ariza confirmed that he had played the serenade, that he had composed the waltz, and 
that it bore the name he called Fermina Daza in his heart: “The Crowned Goddess.” He 
did not play it in the park again, but on moonlit nights in places chosen so that she could 
listen without fear in her bedroom. One of his favored spots was the paupers’ cemetery, 
exposed to the sun and the rain on an indigent hill, where turkey buzzards dozed and the 
music achieved a supernatural resonance. Later he learned to recognize the direction of 
the winds, and in this way he was certain that his melody carried as far as it had to. 

In August of that year a new civil war, one of the many that had been devastating the 
country for over half a century, threatened to spread, and the government imposed martial 
law and a six o’clock curfew in the provinces along the Caribbean coast. Although some 
disturbances had already occurred, and the troops had committed all kinds of retaliatory 
abuses, Florentino Ariza was so befuddled that he was unaware of the state of the world, 
and a military patrol surprised him one dawn as he disturbed the chastity of the dead with 
his amorous provocations. By some miracle he escaped summary execution after he was 
accused of being a spy who sent messages in the key of G to the Liberal ships marauding 
in nearby waters. 

“What the hell do you mean, a spy?” said Florentino Ariza. “I’m nothing but a poor 
lover.” 

For three nights he slept with irons around his ankles in the cells of the local garrison. 
But when he was released he felt defrauded by the brevity of his captivity, and even in 
the days of his old age, when so many other wars were confused in his memory, he still 
thought he was the only man in the city, and perhaps the country, who had dragged five-
pound leg irons for the sake of love. 

Their frenetic correspondence was almost two years old when Florentino Ariza, in a 
letter of only one paragraph, made a formal proposal of marriage to Fermina Daza. On 
several occasions during the preceding six months he had sent her a white camellia, but 
she would return it to him in her next letter so that he would have no doubt that she was 
disposed to continue writing to him, but without the seriousness of an engagement. The 
truth is that she had always taken the comings and goings of the camellia as a lovers’ 
game, and it had never occurred to her to consider it as a crossroads in her destiny. But 
when the formal proposal arrived she felt herself wounded for the first time by the 
clawings of death. Panic-stricken, she told her Aunt Escolástica, who gave her advice 
with the courage and lucidity she had not had when she was twenty and was forced to 
decide her own fate. 

“Tell him yes,” she said. “Even if you are dying of fear, even if you are sorry later, 
because whatever you do, you will be sorry all the rest of your life if you say no.” 

Fermina Daza, however, was so confused that she asked for some time to think it over. 
First she asked for a month, then two, then three, and when the fourth month had ended 
and she had still not replied, she received a white camellia again, not alone in the 


envelope as on other occasions but with the peremptory notification that this was the last 
one: it was now or never. Then that same afternoon it was Florentino Ariza who saw the 
face of death when he received an envelope containing a strip of paper, torn from the 
margin of a school notebook, on which a one-line answer was written in pencil: Very 
well, I will marry you if you promise not to make me eat eggplant. 

Florentino Ariza was not prepared for that answer, but his mother was. Since he had 
first spoken to her six months earlier about his intention to marry, Tránsito Ariza had 
begun negotiatio ns for renting the entire house which, until that time, she had shared with 
two other families. A two-story structure dating from the seventeenth century, it was the 
building where the tobacco monopoly had been located under Spanish rule, and its ruined 
owners had been obliged to rent it out in bits and pieces because they did not have the 
money to maintain it. It had one section facing the street, where the retail tobacco shop 
had been, another section at the rear of a paved patio, where the factory had been located, 
and a very large stable that the current tenants used in common for washing and drying 
their clothes. Tránsito Ariza occupied the first section, which was the most convenient 
and the best preserved, although it was also the smallest. The notions store was in the old 
tobacco shop, with a large door facing the street, and to one side was the former 
storeroom, with only a skylight for ventilation, where Tránsito Ariza slept. The 
stockroom took up half the space that was divided by a wooden partition. In it were a 
table and four chairs, used for both eating and writing, and it was there that Florentino 
Ariza hung his hammock when dawn did not find him writing. It was a good space for the 
two of them, but too small for a third person, least of all a young lady from the Academy 
of the Presentation of the Blessed Virgin whose father had restored a house in ruins until 
it was like new, while the families with seven titles went to bed with the fear that the 
roofs of their mansions would cave in on them while they slept. So Tránsito Ariza had 
arranged with the owner to let her also occupy the gallery in the patio, and in exchange 
she would keep the house in good condition for five years. 

She had the resources to do so. In addition to the cash income from the notions store 
and the hemostatic rags, which sufficed for her modest life, she had multiplied her 
savings by lending them to a clientele made up of the embarrassed new poor, who 
accepted her excessive interest rates for the sake of her discretion. Ladies with the airs of 
queens descended from their carriages at the entrance to the notions shop, unencumbered 
by nursemaids or servants, and as they pretended to buy Holland laces and passementerie 
trimmings, they pawned, between sobs, the last glittering ornaments of their lost paradise. 
Tránsito Ariza rescued them from difficulties with so much consideration for their 
lineage that many of them left more grateful for the honor than for the favor they had 
received. In less than ten years she knew the jewels, so often redeemed and then tearfully 
pawned again, as if they had been her own, and at the time her son decided to marry, the 
profits, converted into gold, lay hidden in a clay jar under her bed. Then she did her 
accounts and discovered not only that she could undertake to keep the rented house 
standing for five years, but that with the same shrewdness and a little more luck she could 
perhaps buy it, before she died, for the twelve grandchildren she hoped to have. 
Florentino Ariza, for his part, had received provisional appointment as First Assistant at 
the telegraph office, and Lotario Thugut wanted him to head the office when he left to 
direct the School of Telegraphy and Magnetism, which he expected to do the following 
year. 


So the practical side of the marriage was resolved. Still, Tránsito Ariza thought that 
two final conditions were prudent. The first was to find out who Lorenzo Daza really 
was, for though his accent left no doubt concerning his origins, no one had any certain 
information as to his identity and livelihood. The second was that the engagement be a 
long one so that the fiancés could come to know each other person to person, and that the 
strictest reserve be maintained until both felt very certain of their affections. She 
suggested they wait until the war was over. Florentino Ariza agreed to absolute secrecy, 
not only for his mother’s reasons but because of the hermeticism of his own character. He 
also agreed to the delay, but its terms seemed unrealistic to him, since in over half a 
century of independent life the nation had not had a single day of civil peace. 

“We’ll grow old waiting,” he said. 

His godfather, the homeopathic practitioner, who happened to be taking part in the 
conversation, did not believe that the wars were an obstacle. He thought they were 
nothing more than the struggles of the poor, driven like oxen by the landowners, against 
barefoot soldiers who were driven in turn by the government. 

“The war is in the mountains,” he said. “For as long as I can remember, they have 
killed us in the cities with decrees, not with bullets.” 

In any case, the details of the engagement were settled in their letters during the weeks 
that followed. Fermina Daza, on the advice of her Aunt Escolástica, accepted both the 
two-year extension and the condition of absolute secrecy, and suggested that Florentino 
Ariza ask for her hand when she finished secondary school, during the Christmas 
vacation. When the time came they would decide on how the engagement was to be 
formalized, depending on the degree of approval she obtained from her father. In the 
meantime, they continued to write to each other with the same ardor and frequency, but 
free of the turmoil they had felt before, and their letters tended toward a domestic tone 
that seemed appropriate to husband and wife. Nothing disturbed their dreams. 

Florentino Ariza’s life had changed. Requited love had given him a confidence and 
strength he had never known before, and he was so efficient in his work that Lotario 
Thugut had no trouble having him named his permanent assistant. By that time his plans 
for the School of Telegraphy and Magnetism had failed, and the German dedicated his 
free time to the only thing he really enjoyed: going to the port to play the accordion and 
drink beer with the sailors, finishing the evening at the transient hotel. It was a long time 
before Florentino Ariza, realized that Lotario Thugut’s influence in the palace of pleasure 
was due to the fact that he had become the owner of the establishment as well as 
impresario for the birds in the port. He had bought it gradually with his savings of many 
years, but the person who ran it for him was a lean, one-eyed little man with a polished 
head and a heart so kind that no one understood how he could be such a good manager. 
But he was. At least it seemed that way to Florentino Ariza when the manager told him, 
without his requesting it, that he had the permanent use of a room in the hotel, not only to 
resolve problems of the lower belly whenever he decided to do so, but so that he could 
have at his disposal a quiet place for his reading and his love letters. And as the long 
months passed until the formalizing of the engagement, he spent more time there than at 
the office or his house, and there were periods when Tránsito Ariza saw him only when 
he came home to change his clothes. 

Reading had become his insatiable vice. Ever since she had taught him to read, his 
mother had bought him illustrated books by Nordic authors which were sold as stories for 


children but in reality were the crudest and most perverse that one could read at any age. 
When he was five years old, Florentino Ariza would recite them from memory, both in 
his classes and at literary evenings at school, but his familiarity with them did not 
alleviate the terror they caused. On the contrary, it became acute. So that when he began 
to read poetry, by comparison it was like finding an oasis. Even during his adolescence 
he had devoured, in the order of their appearance, all the volumes of the Popular Library 
that Tránsito Ariza bought from the bargain booksellers at the Arcade of the Scribes, 
where one could find everything from Homer to the least meritorious of the local poets. 
But he made no distinctions: he read whatever came his way, as if it had been ordained 
by fate, and despite his many years of reading, he still could not judge what was good and 
what was not in all that he had read. The only thing clear to him was that he preferred 
verse to prose, and in verse he preferred love poems that he memorized without even 
intending to after the second reading, and the better rhymed and metered they were, and 
the more heartrending, the more easily he learned them. 

They were the original source of his first letters to Fermina Daza, those half-baked 
endearments taken whole from the Spanish romantics, and his letters continued in that 
vein until real life obliged him to concern himself with matters more mundane than 
heartache. By that time he had moved on to tearful serialized novels and other, even more 
profane prose of the day. He had learned to cry with his mother as they read the 
pamphlets by local poets that were sold in plazas and arcades for two centavos each. But 
at the same time he was able to recite from memory the most exquisite Castilian poetry of 
the Golden Age. In general, he read everything that fell into his hands in the order in 
which it fell, so that long after those hard years of his first love, when he was no longer 
young, he would read from first page to last the twenty volumes of the Young People’s 
Treasury, the complete catalogue of the Gamier Bros. Classics in translation, and the simplest 
works that Don Vicente Blasco Ibáñez published in the Prometeo collection. 

In any event, his youthful adventures in the transient hotel were not limited to reading 
and composing feverish letters but also included his initiation into the secrets of loveless 
love. Life in the house began after noon, when his friends the birds got up as bare as the 
day they were born, so that when Florentino Ariza arrived after work he found a palace 
populated by naked nymphs who shouted their commentaries on the secrets of the city, 
which they knew because of the faithlessness of the protagonists. Many displayed in their 
nudity traces of their past: scars of knife thrusts in the belly, starbursts of guns hot 
wounds, ridges of the razor cuts of love, Caesarean sections sewn up by butchers. Some 
of them had their young children with them dur ing the day, those unfortunate fruits of 
youthful defiance or carelessness, and they took off their children’s clothes as soon as 
they were brought in so they would not feel different in that paradise of nudity. Each one 
cooked her own food, and no one ate better than Florentino Ariza when they invited him 
for a meal, because he chose the best from each. It was a daily fiesta that lasted until 
dusk, when the naked women marched, singing, toward the bathrooms, asked to borrow 
soap, toothbrushes, scissors, cut each other’s hair, dressed in borrowed clothes, painted 
themselves like lugubrious clowns, and went out to hunt the first prey of the night. Then 
life in the house became impersonal and dehumanized, and it was impossible to share in 
it without paying. 

Since he had known Fermina Daza, there was no place where Florentino Ariza felt 
more at ease, because it was the only place where he felt that he was with her. Perhaps it 


was for similar reasons that an elegant older woman with beautiful silvery hair lived there 
but did not participate in the uninhibited life of the naked women, who professed 
sacramental respect for her. A premature sweetheart had taken her there when she was 
young, and after enjoying her for a time, abandoned her to her fate. Nevertheless, despite 
the stigma, she had made a good marriage. When she was quite old and alone, two sons 
and three daughters argued over who would have the pleasure of taking her to live with 
them, but she could not think of a better place to live than that hotel of her youthful 
debaucheries. Her permanent room was her only home, and this made for immediate 
communion with Florentino Ariza, who, she said, would become a wise man known 
throughout the world because he could enrich his soul with reading in a paradise of 
salaciousness. Florentino Ariza, for his part, developed so much affection for her that he 
helped her with her shopping and would spend the afternoons in conversation with her. 
He thought she was a woman wise in the ways of love, since she offered many insights 
into his affair without his having to reveal any secrets to her. 

If he had not given in to the many temptations at hand before he experienced Fermina 
Daza’s love, he certainly would not succumb now that she was his official betrothed. So 
Florentino Ariza lived with the girls and shared their pleasures and miseries, but it did not 
occur to him or them to go any further. An unforeseen event demonstrated the severity of 
his determination. One afternoon at six o’clock, when the girls were dressing to receive 
that evening’s clients, the woman who cleaned the rooms on his floor in the hotel came 
into his cubicle. She was young, but haggard and old before her time, like a fully dressed 
penitent surrounded by glorious nakedness. He saw her every day without feeling himself 
observed: she walked through the rooms with her brooms, a bucket for the trash, and a 
special rag for picking up used condoms from the floor. She came into the room where 
Florentino Ariza lay reading, and as always she cleaned with great care so as not to 
disturb him. Then she passed close to the bed, and he felt a warm and tender hand low on 
his belly, he felt it searching, he felt it finding, he felt it unbuttoning his trousers while 
her breathing filled the room. He pretended to read until he could not bear it any longer 
and had to move his body out of the way. 

She was dismayed, for the first thing they warned her about when they gave her the 
cleaning job was that she should not try to sleep with the clients. They did not have to tell 
her that, because she was one of those women who thought that prostitution did not mean 
going to bed for money but going to bed with a stranger. She had two children, each by a 
different father, not because they were casual adventures but because she could never 
love any man who came back after the third visit. Until that time she had been a woman 
without a sense of urgency, a woman whose nature prepared her to wait without despair, 
but life in that house proved stronger than her virtue. She came to work at six in the 
afternoon, and she spent the whole night going through the rooms, sweeping them out, 
picking up condoms, changing the sheets. It was difficult to imagine the number of things 
that men left after love. They left vomit and tears, which seemed understandable to her, 
but they also left many enigmas of intimacy: puddles of blood, patches of excrement, 
glass eyes, go ld watches, false teeth, lockets with golden curls, love letters, business 
letters, condolence letters--all kinds of letters. Some came back for the items they had 
lost, but most were unclaimed, and Lotario Thugut kept them under lock and key and 
thought that sooner or later the palace that had seen better days, with its thousands of 
forgotten belongings, would become a museum of love. 


The work was hard and the pay was low, but she did it well. What she could not endure 
were the sobs, the laments, the creaking of the bedsprings, which filled her blood with so 
much ardor and so much sorrow that by dawn she could not bear the desire to go to bed 
with the first beggar she met on the street, with any miserable drunk who would give her 
what she wanted with no pretensions and no questions. The appearance of a man like 
Florentino Ariza, young, clean, and without a woman, was for her a gift from heaven, 
because from the first moment she realized that he was just like her: someone in need of 
love. But he was unaware of her compelling desire. He had kept his virginity for Fermina 
Daza, and there was no force or argument in this world that could turn him from his 
purpose. 

That was his life, four months before the date set for formalizing the engagement, when 
Lorenzo Daza showed up at the telegraph office one morning at seven o’clock and asked 
for him. Since he had not yet arrived, Lorenzo Daza waited on the bench until ten 
minutes after eight, slipping a heavy gold ring with its noble opal stone from one finger 
to another, and as soon as Florentino Ariza came in, he recognized him as the employee 
who had delivered the telegram, and he took him by the arm. 

“Come with me, my boy,” he said. “You and I have to talk for five minutes, man to 
man.” 

Florentino Ariza, as green as a corpse, let himself be led. He was not prepared for this 
meeting, because Fermina Daza had not found either the occasion or the means to warn 
him. The fact was that on the previous Saturday, Sister Franca de la Luz, Superior of the 
Academy of the Presentation of the Blessed Virgin, had come into the class on Ideas of 
Cosmogony with the stealth of a serpent, and spying on the students over their shoulders, 
she discovered that Fermina Daza was pretending to take notes in her notebook when in 
reality she was writing a love letter. According to the rules of the Academy, that error 
was reason for expulsion. Lorenzo Daza received an urgent summons to the rectory, 
where he discovered the leak through which his iron regime was trickling. Fermina Daza, 
with her innate fortitude, confessed to the error of the letter, but refused to reveal the 
identity of her secret sweetheart and refused again before the Tribunal of the Order 
which, therefore, confirmed the verdict of expulsion. Her father, however, searched her 
room, until then an inviolate sanctuary, and in the false bottom of her trunk he found the 
packets of three years’ worth of letters hidden away with as much love as had inspired 
their writing. The signature was unequivocal, but Lorenzo Daza could not believe--not 
then, not ever--that his daughter knew nothing about her secret lover except that he 
worked as a telegraph operator and that he loved the violin. 

Certain that such an intricate relationship was understandable only with the complicity 
of his sister, he did not grant her the grace of an excuse or the right of appeal, but shipped 
her on the schooner to San Juan de la Ciénaga. Fermina Daza never found relief from her 
last memory of her aunt on the afternoon when she said goodbye in the doorway, burning 
with fever inside her brown habit, bony and ashen, and then disappeared into the drizzle 
in the little park, carrying all that she owned in life: her spinster’s sleeping mat and 
enough money for a month, wrapped in a handkerchief that she clutched in her fist. As 
soon as she had freed herself from her father’s authority, Fermina Daza began a search 
for her in the Caribbean provinces, asking for information from everyone who might 
know her, and she could not find a trace of her until almost thirty years later when she 
received a letter that had taken a long time to pass through many hands, informing her 


that she had died in the Water of God leprosarium. Lorenzo Daza did not foresee the 
ferocity with which his daughter would react to the unjust punishment of her Aunt 
Escolástica, whom she had always identified with the mother she could barely remember. 
She locked herself in her room, refused to eat or drink, and when at last he persuaded her 
to open the door, first with threats and then with poorly dissimulated pleading, he found a 
wounded panther who would never be fifteen years old again. 

He tried to seduce her with all kinds of flattery. He tried to make her understand that 
love at her age was an illusion, he tried to convince her to send back the letters and return 
to the Academy and beg forgiveness on her knees, and he gave his word of honor that he 
would be the first to help her find happiness with a worthy suitor. But it was like talking 
to a corpse. Defeated, he at last lost his temper at lunch on Monday, and while he choked 
back insults and blasphemies and was about to explode, she put the meat knife to her 
throat, without dramatics but with a steady hand and eyes so aghast that he did not dare to 
challenge her. That was when he took the risk of talking for five minutes, man to man, 
with the accursed upstart whom he did not remember ever having seen, and who had 
come into his life to his great sorrow. By force of habit he picked up his revolver before 
he went out, but he was careful to hide it under his shirt. 

Florentino Ariza still had not recovered when Lorenzo Daza held him by the arm and 
steered him across the Plaza of the Cathedral to the arcaded gallery of the Parish Café and 
invited him to sit on the terrace. There were no other customers at that hour: a black 
woman was scrubbing the tiles in the enormous salon with its chipped and dusty stained-
glass windows, and the chairs were still upside down on the marble tables. Florentino 
Ariza had often seen Lorenzo Daza gambling and drinking cask wine there with the 
Asturians from the public market, while they shouted and argued about other longstanding 
wars that had nothing to do with our own. Conscious of the fatality of love, he 
had often wondered how the meeting would be that he was bound to have with Lorenzo 
Daza sooner or later, the meeting that no human power could forestall because it had 
been inscribed in both their destinies forever. He had supposed it would be an unequal 
dispute, not only because Fermina Daza had warned him in her letters of her father’s 
stormy character, but because he himself had noted that his eyes seemed angry even 
when he was laughing at the gaming table. Everything about him was a testimony to 
crudeness: his ignoble belly, his emphatic speech, his lynx’s side-whiskers, his rough 
hands, the ring finger smothered by the opal setting. His only endearing trait, which 
Florentino Ariza recognized the first time he saw him walking, was that he had the same 
doe’s gait as his daughter. However, when he showed him the chair so that he could sit 
down, he did not find Lorenzo Daza as harsh as he appeared to be, and his courage 
revived when he invited him to have a glass of anisette. Florentino Ariza had never had a 
drink at eight o’clock in the morning, but he accepted with gratitude because his need for 
one was urgent. 

Lorenzo Daza, in fact, took no more than five minutes to say what he had to say, and 
he did so with a disarming sincerity that confounded Florentino Ariza. When his wife 
died he had set only one goal for himself: to turn his daughter into a great lady. The road 
was long and uncertain for a mule trader who did not know how to read or write and 
whose reputation as a horse thief was not so much proven as widespread in the province 
of San Juan de la Ciénaga. He lit a mule driver’s cigar and lamented: “The only thing 
worse than bad health is a bad name.” He said, however, that the real secret of his fortune 


was that none of his mules worked as hard and with so much determination as he did 
himself, even during the bitterest days of the wars when the villages awoke in ashes and 
the fields in ruins. Although his daughter was never aware of the premeditation in her 
destiny, she behaved as if she were an enthusiastic accomplice. She was intelligent and 
methodical, to the point where she taught her father to read as soon as she herself learned 
to, and at the age of twelve she had a mastery of reality that would have allowed her to 
run the house without the help of her Aunt Escolástica. He sighed: “She’s a mule worth 
her weight in gold.” When his daughter finished primary school with highest marks in 
every subject and honorable mention at graduation, he understood that San Juan de la 
Ciénaga was too narrow for his dreams. Then he liquidated lands and animals and moved 
with new impetus and seventy thousand gold pesos to this ruined city and its moth-eaten 
glories, where a beautiful woman with an old-fashioned upbringing still had the 
possibility of being reborn through a fortunate marriage. The sudden appearance of 
Florentino Ariza had been an unforeseen obstacle in his hard-fought plan. “So I have 
come to make a request of you,” said Lorenzo Daza. He dipped the end of his cigar in the 
anisette, pulled on it and drew no smoke, then concluded in a sorrowful voice: 

“Get out of our way.” 

Florentino Ariza had listened to him as he sipped his anisette, and was so absorbed in 
the disclosure of Fermina Daza’s past that he did not even ask himself what he was going 
to say when it was his turn to speak. But when the moment arrived, he realized that 
anything he might say would compromise his destiny. 

“Have you spoken to her?” he asked. 

“That doesn’t concern you,” said Lorenzo Daza. 

“I ask you the question,” said Florentino Ariza, “because it seems to me that she is the 
one who has to decide.” 

“None of that,” said Lorenzo Daza. “This is a matter for men and it will be decided by 
men.” 

His tone had become threatening, and a customer who had just sat down at a nearby 
table turned to look at them. Florentino Ariza spoke in a most tenuous voice, but with the 
most imperious resolution of which he was capable: 

“Be that as it may, I cannot answer without knowing what she thinks. It would be a 
betrayal.” 

Then Lorenzo Daza leaned back in his chair, his eyelids reddened and damp, and his 
left eye spun in its orbit and stayed twisted toward the outside. He, too, lowered his voice. 

“Don’t force me to shoot you,” he said. 

Florentino Ariza felt his intestines filling with cold froth. But his voice did not tremble 
because he felt himself illuminated by the Holy Spirit. 

“Shoot me,” he said, with his hand on his chest. “There is no greater glory than to die 
for love.” 

Lorenzo Daza had to look at him sideways, like a parrot, to see him with his twisted 
eye. He did not pronounce the four words so much as spit them out, one by one: 

“Son of a bitch!” 

That same week he took his daughter away on the journey that would make her forget. 
He gave her no explanation at all, but burst into her bedroom, his mustache stained with 
fury and his chewed cigar, and ordered her to pack. She asked him where they were 
going, and he answered: “To our death.” Frightened by a response that seemed too close 


to the truth, she tried to face him with the courage of a few days before, but he took off 
his belt with its hammered copper buckle, twisted it around his fist, and hit the table with 
a blow that resounded through the house like a rifle shot. Fermina Daza knew very well 
the extent and occasion of her own strength, and so she packed a bedroll with two straw 
mats and a hammock, and two large trunks with all her clothes, certain that this was a trip 
from which she would never return. Before she dressed, she locked herself in the bathroom 
and wrote a brief farewell letter to Florentino Ariza on a sheet torn from the pack of 
toilet paper. Then she cut off her entire braid at the nape of her neck with cuticle scissors, 
rolled it inside a velvet box embroidered with gold thread, and sent it along with the 
letter. 

It was a demented trip. The first stage along the ridges of the Sierra Nevada, riding 
muleback in a caravan of Andean mule drivers, lasted eleven days, during which time 
they were stupefied by the naked sun or drenched by the horizontal October rains and 
almost always petrified by the numbing vapors rising from the precipices. On the third 
day a mule maddened by gadflies fell into a ravine with its rider, dragging along the 
entire line, and the screams of the man and his pack of seven animals tied to one another 
continued to rebound along the cliffs and gullies for several hours after the disaster, and 
continued to resound for years and years in the memory of Fermina Daza. All her 
baggage plunged over the side with the mules, but in the centuries-long instant of the fall 
until the scream of terror was extinguished at the bottom, she did not think of the poor 
dead mule driver or his mangled pack but of how unfortunate it was that the mule she 
was riding had not been tied to the others as well. 

It was the first time she had ever ridden, but the terror and unspeakable privations of 
the trip would not have seemed so bitter to her if it had not been for the certainty that she 
would never see Florentino Ariza again or have the consolation of his letters. She had not 
said a word to her father since the beginning of the trip, and he was so confounded that he 
hardly spoke to her even when it was an absolute necessity to do so, or he sent the mule 
drivers to her with messages. When their luck was good they found some roadside inn 
that served rustic food which she refused to eat, and rented them canvas cots stained with 
rancid perspiration and urine. But more often they spent the night in Indian settlements, 
in open-air public dormitories built at the side of the road, with their rows of wooden 
poles and roofs of bitter palm where every passerby had the right to stay until dawn. 
Fermina Daza could not sleep through a single night as she sweated in fear and listened in 
the darkness to the coming and going of silent travelers who tied their animals to the 
poles and hung their hammocks where they could. 

At nightfall, when the first travelers would arrive, the place was uncrowded and 
peaceful, but by dawn it had been transformed into a fairground, with a mass of 
hammocks hanging at different levels and Aruac Indians from the mountains sleeping on 
their haunches, with the raging of the tethered goats, and the uproar of the fighting cocks 
in their pharaonic crates, and the panting silence of the mountain dogs, who had been 
taught not to bark because of the dangers of war. Those privations were familiar to 
Lorenzo Daza, who had trafficked through the region for half his life and almost always 
met up with old friends at dawn. For his daughter it was perpetual agony. The stench of 
the loads of salted catfish added to the loss of appetite caused by her grief, and eventually 
destroyed her habit of eating, and if she did not go mad with despair it was because she 
always found relief in the memory of Florentino Ariza. She did not doubt that this was 


the land of forgetting. 

Another constant terror was the war. Since the start of the journey there had been talk 
of the danger of running into scattered patrols, and the mule drivers had instructed them 
in the various ways of recognizing the two sides so that they could act accordingly. They 
often encountered squads of mounted soldiers under the command of an officer, who 
rounded up new recruits by roping them as if they were cattle on the hoof. Overwhelmed 
by so many horrors, Fermina Daza had forgotten about the one that seemed more 
legendary than imminent, until one night when a patrol of unknown affiliation captured 
two travelers from the caravan and hanged them from a campano tree half a league from 
the settlement. Lorenzo Daza did not even know them, but he had them taken down and 
he gave them a Christian burial in thanksgiving for not having met a similar fate. And he 
had reason: the assailants had awakened him with a rifle in his stomach, and a 
commander in rags, his face smeared with charcoal, had shone a light on him and asked 
him if he was Liberal or Conservative. 

“Neither one or the other,” said Lorenzo Daza. “I am a Spanish subject.” 

“What luck!” said the commander, and he left with his hand raised in a salute. “Long 
live the King!” 

Two days later they descended to the luminous plain where the joyful town of 
Valledupar was located. There were cockfights in the patios, accordion music on the 
street corners, riders on thoroughbred horses, rockets and bells. A pyrotechnical castle 
was being assembled. Fermina Daza did not even notice the festivities. They stayed in the 
home of Uncle Lisímaco Sánchez, her mother’s brother, who had come out to receive 
them on the King’s Highway at the head of a noisy troop of young relatives riding the 
best-bred horses in the entire province, and they were led through the streets of the town 
to the accompaniment of exploding fireworks. The house was on the Grand Plaza, next to 
the colonial church that had been repaired several times, and it seemed more like the 
main house on a hacienda because of its large, somber rooms and its gallery that faced an 
orchard of fruit trees and smelled of hot sugarcane juice. 

No sooner had they dismounted in the stables than the reception rooms were 
overflowing with numerous unknown relatives whose unbearable effusiveness was a 
scourge to Fermina Daza, for she was incapable of ever loving anyone else in this world, 
she suffered from saddle burn, she was dying of fatigue and loose bowels, and all she 
longed for was a solitary and quiet place to cry. Her cousin Hildebranda Sánchez, two 
years older than she and with the same imperial haughtiness, was the only one who 
understood her condition as soon as she saw her, because she, too, was being consumed 
in the fiery coals of reckless love. When it grew dark she took her to the bedroom that she 
had prepared to share with her, and seeing the burning ulcers on her buttocks, she could 
not believe that she still lived. With the help of her mother, a very sweet woman who 
looked as much like her husband as if they were twins, she prepared a bath for her and 
cooled the burning with arnica compresses, while the thunder from the gunpowder castle 
shook the foundations of the house. 

At midnight the visitors left, the public fiesta scattered into smoldering embers, and 
Cousin Hildebranda lent Fermina Daza a madapollam nightgown and helped her to lie 
down in a bed with smooth sheets and feather pillows, and without warning she was filled 
with the instantaneous panic of happiness. When at last they were alone in the bedroom, 
Cousin Hildebranda bolted the door with a crossbar and from under the straw matting of 


her bed took out a manila envelope sealed in wax with the emblem of the national telegraph. 
It was enough for Fermina Daza to see her cousin’s expression of radiant malice 
for the pensive scent of white gardenias to grow again in her heart’s memory, and then 
she tore the red sealing wax with her teeth and drenched the eleven forbidden telegrams 
in a shower of tears until dawn. 

Then he knew. Before starting out on the journey, Lorenzo Daza had made the mistake 
of telegraphing the news to his brother-in-law Lisímaco Sánchez, and he in turn had sent 
the news to his vast and intricate network of kinfolk in numerous towns and villages 
throughout the province. So that Florentino Ariza not only learned the complete itinerary 
but also established an extensive brotherhood of telegraph operators who would follow 
the trail of Fermina Daza to the last settlement in Cabo de la Vela. This allowed him to 
maintain intensive communications with her from the time of her arrival in Valledupar, 
where she stayed three months, until the end of her journey in Riohacha, a year and a half 
later, when Lorenzo Daza took it for granted that his daughter had at last forgotten and he 
decided to return home. Perhaps he was not even aware of how much he had relaxed his 
vigilance, distracted as he was by the flattering words of the in-laws who after so many 
years had put aside their tribal prejudices and welcomed him with open arms as one of 
their own. The visit was a belated reconciliation, although that had not been its purpose. 
As a matter of fact, the family of Fermina Sánchez had been opposed in every way to her 
marrying an immigrant with no background who was a braggart and a boor and who was 
always traveling, trading his unbroken mules in a business that seemed too simple to be 
honest. Lorenzo Daza played for high stakes, because his sweetheart was the darling of a 
typical family of the region: an intricate tribe of wild women and softhearted men who 
were obsessed to the point of dementia with their sense of honor. Fermina Sánchez, 
however, settled on her desire with the blind determination of love when it is opposed, 
and she married him despite her family, with so much speed and so much secrecy that it 
seemed as if she had done so not for love but to cover over with a sacramental cloak 
some premature mistake. 

Twenty-five years later, Lorenzo Daza did not realize that his intransigence in his 
daughter’s love affair was a vicious repetition of his own past, and he complained of his 
misfortune to the same in-laws who had opposed him, as they had complained in their 
day to their own kin. Still, the time he spent in lamentation was time his daughter gained 
for her love affair. So that while he went about castrating calves and taming mules on the 
prosperous lands of his in-laws, she was free to spend time with a troop of female cousins 
under the command of Hildebranda Sánchez, the most beautiful and obliging of them all, 
whose hopeless passion for a married man, a father who was twenty years older than she, 
had to be satisfied with furtive glances. 

After their prolonged stay in Valledupar they continued their journey through the 
foothills of the mountains, crossing flowering meadows and dreamlike mesas, and in all 
the villages they were received as they had been in the first, with music and fireworks 
and new conspiratorial cousins and punctual messages in the telegraph offices. Fermina 
Daza soon realized that the afternoon of their arrival in Valledupar had not been unusual, 
but rather that in this fertile province every day of the week was lived as if it were a 
holiday. The visitors slept wherever they happened to be at nightfall, and they ate 
wherever they happened to be hungry, for these were houses with open doors, where 
there was always a hammock hanging and a three-meat stew simmering on the stove in 


case guests arrived before the telegram announcing their arrival, as was almost always the 
case. Hildebranda Sánchez accompanied her cousin for the remainder of the trip, guiding 
her with joyful spirit through the tangled complexities of her blood to the very source of 
her origins. Fermina Daza learned about herself, she felt free for the first time, she felt 
herself befriended and protected, her lungs full of the air of liberty, which restored her 
tranquillity and her will to live. In her final years she would still recall the trip that, with 
the perverse lucidity of nostalgia, became more and more recent in her memory. 

One night she came back from her daily walk stunned by the revelation that one could 
be happy not only without love, but despite it. The revelation alarmed her, because one of 
her cousins had sur prised her parents in conversation with Lorenzo Daza, who had suggested 
the idea of arranging the marriage of his daughter to the only heir to the fabulous 
fortune of Cleofás Moscote. Fermina Daza knew who he was. She had seen him in the 
plazas, pirouetting his perfect horses with trappings so rich they seemed ornaments used 
for the Mass, and he was elegant and clever and had a dreamer’s eyelashes that could 
make the stones sigh, but she compared him to her memory of poor emaciated Florentino 
Ariza sitting under the almond trees in the little park, with the book of verses on his lap, 
and she did not find even the shadow of a doubt in her heart. 

In those days Hildebranda Sánchez was delirious with hope after visiting a fortuneteller 
whose clairvoyance had astonished her. Dismayed by her father’s intentions, 
Fermina Daza also went to consult with her. The cards said there was no obstacle in her 
future to a long and happy marriage, and that prediction gave her back her courage 
because she could not conceive of such a fortunate destiny with any man other than the 
one she loved. Exalted by that certainty, she assumed command of her fate. That was how 
the telegraphic correspondence with Florentino Ariza stopped being a concerto of intentions 
and illusory promises and became methodical and practical and more intense than 
ever. They set dates, established means, pledged their lives to their mutual determination 
to marry without consulting anyone, wherever and however they could, as soon as they 
were together again. Fermina Daza considered this commitment so binding that the night 
her father gave her permission to attend her first adult dance in the town of Fonseca, she 
did not think it was decent to accept without the consent of her fiancé. Florentino Ariza 
was in the transient hotel that night, playing cards with Lotario Thugut, when he was told 
he had an urgent telegram on the line. 

It was the telegraph operator from Fonseca, who had keyed in through seven 
intermediate stations so that Fermina Daza could ask permission to attend the dance. 
When she obtained it, however, she was not satisfied with the simple affirmative answer 
but asked for proof that in fact it was Florentino Ariza operating the telegraph key at the 
other end of the line. More astonished than flattered, he composed an identifying phrase: 
Tell her that I swear by the crowned goddess. Fermina Daza recognized the password and 
stayed at her first adult dance until seven in the morning, when she had to change in a 
rush in order not to be late for Mass. By then she had more letters and telegrams in the 
bottom of her trunk than her father had taken away from her, and she had learned to 
behave with the air of a married woman. Lorenzo Daza interpreted these changes in her 
manner as proof that distance and time had cured her of her juvenile fantasies, but he 
never spoke to her about his plans for the arranged marriage. Their relations had become 
fluid within the formal reserve that she had imposed since the expulsion of Aunt 
Escolástica, and this allowed them such a comfortable modus vivendi that no one would 


have doubted that it was based on affection. 

It was at this time that Florentino Ariza decided to tell her in his letters of his 
determination to salvage the treasure of the sunken galleon for her. It was true, and it had 
come to him in a flash of inspiration one sunlit afternoon when the sea seemed paved 
with aluminum because of the numbers of fish brought to the surface by mullein. All the 
birds of the air were in an uproar because of the kill, and the fishermen had to drive them 
away with their oars so they would not have to fight with them for the fruits of that prohibited 
miracle. The use of the mullein plant to put the fish to sleep had been prohibited 
by law since colonial times, but it continued to be a common practice-among the 
fishermen of the Caribbean until it was replaced by dynamite. One of Florentino Ariza’s 
pastimes during Fermina Daza’s journey was to watch from the jetties as the fishermen 
loaded their canoes with enormous nets filled with sleeping fish. At the same time, a gang 
of boys who swam like sharks asked curious bystanders to toss coins into the water so 
they could dive to the bottom for them. They were the same boys who swam out to meet 
the ocean liners for that purpose, and whose skill in the art of diving had been the subject 
of so many tourist accounts written in the United States and Europe. Florentino Ariza had 
always known about them, even before he knew about love, but it had never occurred to 
him that perhaps they might be able to bring up the fortune from the galleon. It occurred 
to him that afternoon, and from the following Sunday until Fermina Daza’s return almost 
a year later, he had an additional motive for delirium. 

After talking to him for only ten minutes, Euclides, one of the boy swimmers, became 
as excited as he was at the idea of an underwater exploration. Florentino Ariza did not 
reveal the whole truth of the enterprise, but he informed himself thoroughly regarding his 
abilities as a diver and navigator. He asked him if he could descend without air to a depth 
of twenty meters, and Euclides told him yes. He asked him if he was prepared to sail a 
fisherman’s canoe by himself in the open sea in the middle of a storm with no 
instruments other than his instinct, and Euclides told him yes. He asked him if he could 
find a specific spot sixteen nautical miles to the northwest of the largest island in the 
Sotavento Archipelago, and Euclides told him yes. He asked him if he was capable of 
navigating by the stars at night, and Euclides told him yes. He asked him if he was 
prepared to do so for the same wages the fishermen paid him for helping them to fish, and 
Euclides told him yes, but with an additional five reales on Sundays. He asked him if he 
knew how to defend himself against sharks, and Euclides told him yes, for he had magic 
tricks to frighten them away. He asked him if he was able to keep a secret even if they put 
him in the torture chambers of the Inquisition, and Euclides told him yes, in fact he did 
not say no to anything, and he knew how to say yes with so much conviction that there 
was no way to doubt him. Then the boy reckoned expenses: renting the canoe, renting the 
canoe paddle, renting fishing equipment so that no one would suspect the truth behind 
their incursions. It was also necessary to take along food, a demijohn of fresh water, an 
oil lamp, a pack of tallow candles, and a hunter’s horn to call for help in case of 
emergency. 

Euclides was about twelve years old, and he was fast and clever and an incessant 
talker, with an eel’s body that could slither through a bull’s-eye. The weather had tanned 
his skin to such a degree that it was impossible to imagine his original color, and this 
made his big yellow eyes seem more radiant. Florentino Ariza decided on the spot that he 
was the perfect companion for an adventure of such magnitude, and they embarked 


without further delay the following Sunday. 

They sailed out of the fishermen’s port at dawn, well provisioned and better disposed, 
Euclides almost naked, with only the loincloth that he always wore, and Florentino Ariza 
with his frock coat, his tenebrous hat, his patent-leather boots, the poet’s bow at his neck, 
and a book to pass the time during the crossing to the islands. From the very first Sunday 
he realized that Euclides was as good a navigator as he was a diver, and that he had 
astonishing knowledge of the character of the sea and the debris in the bay. He could 
recount in the most unexpected detail the history of each rusting hulk of a boat, he knew 
the age of each buoy, the origin of every piece of rubbish, the number of links in the 
chain with which the Spaniards closed off the entrance of the bay. Fearing that he might 
also know the real purpose of his expedition, Florentino Ariza asked him sly questions 
and in this way realized that Euclides did not have the slightest suspicion about the 
sunken galleon. 

Ever since he had first heard the story of the treasure in the transient hotel, Florentino 
Ariza had learned all he could about the habits of galleons. He learned that the San José 
was not the only ship in the coral depths. It was, in fact, the flagship of the Terra Firma 
fleet, and had arrived here after May 1708, having sailed from the legendary fair of 
Portobello in Panama where it had taken on part of its fortune: three hundred trunks of 
silver from Peru and Veracruz, and one hundred ten trunks of pearls gathered and 
counted on the island of Contadora. During the long month it had remained here, the days 
and nights had been devoted to popular fiestas, and the rest of the treasure intended to 
save the Kingdom of Spain from poverty had been taken aboard: one hundred sixteen 
trunks of emeralds from Muzo and Somondoco and thirty million gold coins. 

The Terra Firma fleet was composed of no less than twelve supply ships of varying 
sizes, and it set sail from this port traveling in a convoy with a French squadron that was 
heavily armed but still incapable of protecting the expedition from the accurate cannon 
shot of the English squadron under Commander Charles Wager, who waited for it in the 
Sotavento Archipelago, at the entrance to the bay. So the San José was not the only 
sunken vessel, although there was no reliable documented record of how many had 
succumbed and how many had managed to escape the English fire. What was certain was 
that the flagship had been among the first to sink, along with the entire crew and the 
commander standing straight on the quarterdeck, and that she alone carried most of the 
cargo. 

Florentino Ariza had learned the route of the galleons from the navigation charts of the 
period, and he thought he had determined the site of the shipwreck. They left the bay 
between the two fortresses of Boca Chica, and after four hours of sailing they entered the 
interior still waters of the archipelago in whose coral depths they could pick up sleeping 
lobsters with their hands. The air was so soft and the sea so calm and clear that Florentino 
Ariza felt as if he were his own reflection in the water. At the far end of the backwater, 
two hours from the largest island, was the site of the shipwreck. 

Suffocating in his formal clothes under the infernal sun, Florentino Ariza indicated to 
Euclides that he should try to dive to a depth of twenty meters and bring back anything he 
might find at the bottom. The water was so clear that he saw him moving below like a 
tarnished shark among the blue ones that crossed his path without touching him. Then he 
saw him disappear into a thicket of coral, and just when he thought that he could not 
possibly have any more air in his lungs, he heard his voice at his back. Euclides was 


standing on the bottom, with his arms raised and the water up to his waist. And so they 
continued exploring deeper sites, always moving toward the north, sailing over the 
indifferent manta rays, the timid squid, the rosebushes in the shadows, until Euclides 
concluded that they were wasting their time. 

“If you don’t tell me what you want me to find, I don’t know how I am going to find 
it,” he said. 

But he did not tell him. Then Euclides proposed to him that he take off his clothes and 
dive with him, even if it was only to see that other sky below the world, the coral depths. 
But Florentino Ariza always said that God had made the sea to look at through the 
window, and he had never learned to swim. A short while later, the afternoon grew 
cloudy and the air turned cold and damp, and it grew dark with so little warning that they 
had to navigate by the lighthouse to find the port. Before they entered the bay, the 
enormous white ocean liner from France passed very close to them, all its lights blazing 
as it trailed a wake of tender stew and boiled cauliflower. 

They wasted three Sundays in this way, and they would have continued to waste them 
all if Florentino Ariza had not decided to share his secret with Euclides, who then 
modified the entire search plan, and they sailed along the old channel of the galleons, 
more than twenty nautical leagues to the east of the spot Florentino Ariza had decided on. 
Less than two months had gone by when, one rainy afternoon out at sea, Euclides spent 
considerable time down on the bottom and the canoe drifted so much that he had to swim 
almost half an hour to reach it because Florentino Ariza could not row it closer to him. 
When at last he climbed on board, he took two pieces of woman’s jewelry out of his 
mouth and displayed them as if they were the prize for his perseverance. 

What he recounted then was so fascinating that Florentino Ariza promised himself that 
he would learn to swim and dive as far under water as possible just so he could see it with 
his own eyes. He said that in that spot, only eighteen meters down, there were so many 
old sailing ships lying among the coral reefs that it was impossible to even calculate the 
number, and they were spread over so extensive an area that you could not see to the end 
of them. He said that the most surprising thing was that none of the old wrecks afloat in 
the bay was in such good condition as the sunken vessels. He said that there were several 
caravelles with their sails still intact, and that the sunken ships were visible even on the 
bottom, for it seemed as if they had sunk along with their own space and time, so that 
they were still illumined by the same eleven o’clock sun that was shining on Saturday, 
June 9, when they went down. Choking on the driving force of his imagination, he said 
that the easiest one to distinguish was the galleon San José, for its name could be seen on 
the poop in gold letters, but it was also the ship most damaged by English artillery. He 
said he had seen an octopus inside, more than three centuries old, whose tentacles 
emerged through the openings in the cannon and who had grown to such a size in the 
dining room that one would have to destroy the ship to free him. He said he had seen the 
body of the commander, dressed for battle and floating sideways inside the aquarium of 
the forecastle, and that if he had not dived down to the hold with all its treasure, it was 
because he did not have enough air in his lungs. There were the proofs: an emerald 
earring and a medal of the Virgin, the chain corroded by salt. 

That was when Florentino Ariza first mentioned the treasure to Fermina Daza in a letter 
he sent to Fonseca a short while before her return. The history of the sunken galleon was 
familiar to her because she had heard it many times from Lorenzo Daza, who had lost 


both time and money trying to convince a company of German divers to join with him in 
salvaging the sunken treasure. He would have persevered in the enterprise if several 
members of the Academy of History had not convinced him that the legend of the shipwrecked 
galleon had been invented by some brigand of a viceroy to hide his theft of the 
treasures of the Crown. In any case, Fermina Daza knew that the galleon lay beyond the 
reach of any human being, at a depth of two hundred meters, not the twenty claimed by 
Florentino Ariza. But she was so accustomed to his poetic excesses that she celebrated 
the adventure of the galleon as one of his most successful. Still, when she continued to 
receive other letters with still more fantastic details, written with as much seriousness as 
his promises of love, she had to confess to Hildebranda Sánchez her fear that her 
bedazzled sweetheart must have lost his mind. 

During this time Euclides had surfaced with so many proofs of his tale that it was no 
longer a question of playing with earrings and rings scattered amid the coral but of 
financing a major enterprise to salvage the fifty ships with their cargo of Babylonian 
treasure. Then what had to happen sooner or later happened: Florentino Ariza asked his 
mother for help in bringing his adventure to a successful conclusion. All she had to do 
was bite the metal settings and look at the gems made of glass against the light to realize 
that someone was taking advantage of her son’s innocence. Euclides went down on his 
knees and swore to Florentino Ariza that he had done nothing wrong, but he was not seen 
the following Sunday in the fishermen’s port, or anywhere else ever again. 

The only thing Florentino Ariza salvaged from that disaster was the loving shelter of 
the lighthouse. He had gone there in Euclides’ canoe one night when a storm at sea took 
them by surprise, and from that time on he would go there in the afternoons to talk to the 
lighthouse keeper about the innumerable marvels on land and water that the keeper had 
knowledge of. It was the beginning of a friendship that survived the many changes in the 
world. Florentino Ariza learned to feed the fire, first with loads of wood and then with 
large earthen jars of oil, before electrical energy came to us. He learned to direct the light 
and augment it with mirrors, and orí several occasions, when the lighthouse keeper could 
not do so, he stayed to keep watch over the night at sea from the tower. He learned to 
know the ships by their voices, by the size of their lights on the horizon, and to sense that 
something of them came back to him in the flashing beacon of the lighthouse. 

During the day, above all on Sundays, there was another kind of pleasure. In the 
District of the Viceroys, where the wealthy people of the old city lived, the women’s 
beaches were separated from those of the men by a plaster wall: one lay to the right and 
the other to the left of the lighthouse. And so the lighthouse keeper installed a spyglass 
through which one could contemplate the women’s beach by paying a centavo. Without 
knowing they were being observed, the young society ladies displayed themselves to the 
best of their ability in ruffled bathing suits and slippers and hats that hid their bodies 
almost as much as their street clothes did and were less attractive besides. Their mothers, 
sitting out in the sun in wicker rocking chairs, wearing the same dresses, the same 
feathered hats, and holding the same organdy parasols as they had at High Mass, watched 
over them from the shore, for fear the men from the neighboring beaches would seduce 
their daughters under the water. The reality was that one could not see anything more, or 
anything more exciting, through the spyglass than one could see on the street, but there 
were many clients who came every Sunday to wrangle over the telescope for the pure 
delight of tasting the insipid forbidden fruits of the walled area that was denied them. 


Florentino Ariza was one of them, more from boredom than for pleasure, but it was not 
because of that additional attraction that he became a good friend of the lighthouse 
keeper. The real reason was that after Fermina Daza rejected him, when he contracted the 
fever of many disparate loves in his effort to replace her, it was in the lighthouse and 
nowhere else that he lived his happiest hours and found the best consolation for his 
misfortunes. It was the place he loved most, so much so that for years he tried to 
convince his mother, and later his Uncle Leo XII, to help him buy it. For in those days 
the lighthouses in the Caribbean were private property, and their owners charged ships 
according to their size for the right to enter the port. Florentino Ariza thought that it was 
the only honorable way to make a profit out of poetry, but neither his mother nor his 
uncle agreed with him, and by the time he had the resources to do it on his own, the 
lighthouses had become the property of the state. 

None of these dreams was in vain, however. The tale of the galleon and the novelty of 
the lighthouse helped to alleviate the absence of Fermina Daza, and then, when he least 
expected it, he received the news of her return. And in fact, after a prolonged stay in 
Riohacha, Lorenzo Daza had decided to come home. It was not the most benign season 
on the ocean, due to the December trade winds, and the historic schooner, the only one 
that would risk the crossing, might find itself blown by a contrary wind back to the port 
where it had started. And that is what happened. Fermina Daza spent an agonized night 
vomiting bile, strapped to her bunk in a cabin that resembled a tavern latrine not only 
because of its oppressive narrowness but also because of the pestilential stench and the 
heat. The motion was so strong that she had the impression several times that the straps 
on the bed would fly apart; on the deck she heard fragments of shouted lamentations that 
sounded like a shipwreck, and her father’s tigerish snoring in the next bunk added yet 
another ingredient to her terror. For the first time in almost three years she spent an entire 
night awake without thinking for even one moment of Florentino Ariza, while he, on the 
other hand, lay sleepless in his hammock in the back room, counting the eternal minutes 
one by one until her return. At dawn the wind suddenly died down and the sea grew calm, 
and Fermina Daza realized that she had slept despite her devastating seasickness, because 
the noise of the anchor chains awakened her. Then she loosened the straps and went to 
the porthole, hoping to see Florentino Ariza in the tumult of the port, but all she saw were 
the customs sheds among the palm trees gilded by the first rays of the sun and the rotting 
boards of the dock in Riohacha, where the schooner had set sail the night before. 

The rest of the day was like a hallucination: she was in the same house where she had 
been until yesterday, receiving the same visitors who had said goodbye to her, talking 
about the same things, bewildered by the impression that she was reliving a piece of life 
she had already lived. It was such a faithful repetition that Fermina Daza trembled at the 
thought that the schooner trip would be a repetition, too, for the mere memory of it 
terrified her. However, the only other possible means of returning home was two weeks 
on muleback over the mountains in circumstances even more dangerous than the first 
time, since a new civil war that had begun in the Andean state of Cauca was spreading 
throughout the Caribbean provinces. And so at eight o’clock that night she was once 
again accompanied to the port by the same troop of noisy relatives shedding the same 
tears of farewell and with the same jumble of last-minute gifts and packages that did not 
fit in the cabins. When it was time to sail, the men in the family saluted the schooner with 
a volley of shots fired into the air, and Lorenzo Daza responded from the deck with five 


shots from his revolver. Fermina Daza’s fears dissipated because the wind was favorable 
all night, and there was a scent of flowers at sea that helped her to sleep soundly without 
the safety straps. She dreamed that she was seeing Florentino Ariza again, and that he 
took off the face that she had always seen on him because in fact it was a mask, but his 
real face was identical to the false one. She got up very early, intrigued by the enigma of 
the dream, and she found her father drinking mountain coffee with brandy in the 
captain’s bar, his eye twisted by alcohol, but he did not show the slightest hint of 
uncertainty regarding their return. 

They were coming into port. The schooner slipped in silence through the labyrinth of 
sailing ships anchored in the cove of the public market whose stench could be smelled 
several leagues out to sea, and the dawn was saturated by a steady drizzle that soon broke 
into a full-fledged downpour. Standing watch on the balcony of the telegraph office, 
Florentino Ariza recognized the schooner, its sails disheartened by the rain, as it crossedLas Ánimas Bay and anchored at the market pier. The morning before, he had waited 
until eleven o’clock, when he learned through a casual telegram of the contrary winds 
that had delayed the schooner, and on this day he had returned to his vigil at four o’clock 
in the morning. He continued to wait, not taking his eyes off the launch that carried 
ashore the few passengers who had decided to disembark despite the storm. Halfway 
across, the launch ran aground, and most of them had to abandon ship and splash through 
the mud to the pier. At eight o’clock, after they had waited in vain for the rain to stop, a 
black stevedore in water up to his waist received Fermina Daza at the rail of the schooner 
and carried her ashore in his arms, but she was so drenched that Florentino Ariza did not 
recognize her. 

She herself was not aware of how much she had matured during the trip until she 
walked into her closed house and at once undertook the heroic task of making it livable 
again with the help of Gala Placidia, the black servant who came back from her old slave 
quarters as soon as she was told of their return. Fermina Daza was no longer the only 
child, both spoiled and tyrannized by her father, but the lady and mistress of an empire of 
dust and cobwebs that could be saved only by the strength of invincible love. She was not 
intimidated because she felt herself inspired by an exalted courage that would have 
enabled her to move the world. The very night of their return, while they were having hot 
chocolate and crullers at the large kitchen table, her father delegated to her the authority 
to run the house, and he did so with as much formality as if it were a sacred rite. 

“I turn over to you the keys to your life,” he said. 

She, with all of her seventeen years behind her, accepted with a firm hand, conscious 
that every inch of liberty she won was for the sake of love. The next day, after a night of 
bad dreams, she suffered her first sense of displeasure at being home when she opened 
the balcony window and saw again the sad drizzle in the little park, the statue of the 
decapitated hero, the marble bench where Florentino Ariza used to sit with his book of 
verses. She no longer thought of him as the impossible sweetheart but as the certain 
husband to whom she belonged heart and soul. She felt the heavy weight of the time they 
had lost while she was away, she felt how hard it was to be alive and how much love she 
was going to need to love her man as God demanded. She was surprised that he was not 
in the little park, as he had been so many times despite the rain, and that she had received 
no sign of any kind from him, not even a premonition, and she was shaken by the sudden 
idea that he had died. But she put aside the evil thought at once, for in the recent frenzy 


of telegrams regarding her imminent return they had forgotten to agree on a way to 
continue communicating once she was home. 

The truth is that Florentino Ariza was sure she had not returned, until the telegraph 
operator in Riohacha confirmed that they had embarked on Friday aboard the very same 
schooner that did not arrive the day before because of contrary winds, so that during the 
weekend he watched for any sign of life in her house, and at dusk on Monday he saw 
through the windows a light that moved through the house and was extinguished, a little 
after nine, in the bedroom with the balcony. He did not sleep, victim to the same fearful 
nausea that had disturbed his first nights of love. Tránsito Ariza arose with the first 
roosters, alarmed that her son had gone out to the patio at midnight and had not yet come 
back inside, and she did not find him in the ho use. He had gone to wander along the 
jetties, reciting love poetry into the wind and crying with joy until daybreak. At eight 
o’clock he was sitting under the arches of the Parish Café, delirious with fatigue, trying to 
think of how to send his welcome to Fermina Daza, when he felt himself shaken by a 
seismic tremor that tore his heart. 

It was she, crossing the Plaza of the Cathedral, accompanied by Gala Placidia who was 
carrying the baskets for their marketing, and for the first time she was not wearing her 
school uniform. She was taller than when she had left, more polished and intense, her 
beauty purified by the restraint of maturity. Her braid had grown in, but instead of letting 
it hang down her back she wore it twisted over her left shoulder, and that simple change 
had erased all girlish traces from her. Florentino Ariza sat bedazzled until the child of his 
vision had crossed the plaza, looking to neither the left nor the right. But then the same 
irresistible power that had paralyzed him obliged him to hurry after her when she turned 
the corner of the Cathedral and was lost in the deafening noise of the market’s rough 
cobblestones. 

He followed her without letting himself be seen, watching the ordinary gestures, the 
grace, the premature maturity of the being he loved most in the world and whom he was 
seeing for the first time in her natural state. He was amazed by the fluidity with which she 
made her way through the crowd. While Gala Placidia bumped into people and became 
entangled in her baskets and had to run to keep up with her, she navigated the disorder of 
the street in her own time and space, not colliding with anyone, like a bat in the darkness. 
She had often been to the market with her Aunt Escolástica, but they made only minor 
purchases, since her father himself took charge of provisioning the household, not only 
with furniture and food but even with women’s clothing. So this first excursion was for 
her a fascinating adventure idealized in her girlhood dreams. 

She paid no attention to the urgings of the snake charmers who offered her a syrup for 
eternal love, or to the pleas of the beggars lying in doorways with their running sores, or 
to the false Indian who tried to sell her a trained alligator. She made a long and detailed 
tour with no planned itinerary, stopping with no other motive than her unhurried delight 
in the spirit of things. She entered every doorway where there was something for sale, 
and everywhere she found something that increased her desire to live. She relished the 
aroma of vetiver in the cloth in the great chests, she wrapped herself in embossed silks, 
she laughed at her own laughter when she saw herself in the full-length mirror in The 
Golden Wire disguised as a woman from Madrid, with a comb in her hair and a fan 
painted with flowers. In the store that sold imported foods she lifted the lid of a barrel of 
pickled herring that reminded her of nights in the northeast when she was a very little girl 


in San Juan de la Ciénaga. She sampled an Alicante sausage that tasted of licorice, and 
she bought two for Saturday’s breakfast, as well as some slices of cod and a jar of red 
currants in aguardiente. In the spice shop she crushed leaves of sage and oregano in the 
palms of her hands for the pure pleasure of smelling them, and bought a handful of 
cloves, another of star anise, and one each of ginger root and juniper, and she walked 
away with tears of laughter in her eyes because the smell of the cayenne pepper made her 
sneeze so much. In the French cosmetics shop, as she was buying Reuter soaps and 
balsam water, they put a touch of the latest perfume from Paris behind her ear and gave 
her a breath tablet to use after smoking. 

She played at buying, it is true, but what she really needed she bought without 
hesitation, with an authority that allowed no one to think that she was doing so for the 
first time, for she was conscious that she was buying not only for herself but for him as 
well: twelve yards of linen for their table, percale for the marriage sheets that by dawn 
would be damp with moisture from both their bodies, the most exquisite of everything for 
both of them to enjoy in the house of love. She asked for discounts and she got them, she 
argued with grace and dignity until she obtained the best, and she paid with pieces of 
gold that the shopkeepers tested for the sheer pleasure of hearing them sing against the 
marble counters. 

Florentino Ariza spied on her in astonishment, he pursued her breathlessly, he tripped 
several times over the baskets of the maid who responded to his excuses with a smile, and 
she passed so close to him that he could smell her scent, and if she did not see him then it 
was not because she could not but because of the haughty manner in which she walked. 
To him she seemed so beautiful, so seductive, so different from ordinary people, that he 
could not understand why no one was as disturbed as he by the clicking of her heels on 
the paving stones, why no one else’s heart was wild with the breeze stirred by the sighs of 
her veils, why everyone did not go mad with the movements of her braid, the flight of her 
hands, the gold of her laughter. He had not missed a single one of her gestures, not one of 
the indications of her character, but he did not dare approach her for fear of destroying 
the spell. Nevertheless, when she entered the riotous noise of the Arcade of the Scribes, 
he realized that he might lose the moment he had craved for so many years. 

Fermina Daza shared with her schoolmates the singular idea that the Arcade of the 
Scribes was a place of perdition that was forbidden, of course, to decent young ladies. It 
was an arcaded gallery across from a little plaza where carriages and freight carts drawn 
by donkeys were for hire, where popular commerce became noisier and more dense. The 
name dated from colonial times, when the taciturn scribes in their vests and false cuffs 
first began to sit there, waiting for a poor man’s fee to write all kinds of documents: 
memoranda of complaints or petition, legal testimony, cards of congratulation or 
condolence, love letters appropriate to any stage in an affair. They, of course, were not 
the ones who had given that thundering market its bad reputation but more recent 
peddlers who made illegal sales of all kinds of questionable merchandise smuggled in on 
European ships, from obscene postcards and aphrodisiac ointments to the famous 
Catalonian condoms with iguana crests that fluttered when circumstances required or 
with flowers at the tip that would open their petals at the will of the user. Fermina Daza, 
somewhat unskilled in the customs of the street, went through the Arcade without 
noticing where she was going as she searched for a shady refuge from the fierce eleven 
o’clock sun. 


She sank into the hot clamor of the shoeshine boys and the bird sellers, the hawkers of 
cheap books and the witch doctors and the sellers of sweets who shouted over the din of 
the crowd: pineapple sweets for your sweetie, coconut candy is dandy, brown-sugar loaf 
for your sugar. But, indifferent to the uproar, she was captivated on the spot by a paper 
seller who was demonstrating magic inks, red inks with an ambience of blood, inks of sad 
aspect for messages of condolence, phosphorescent inks for reading in the dark, invisible 
inks that revealed themselves in the light. She wanted all of them so she could amuse 
Florentino Ariza and astound him with her wit, but after several trials she decided on a 
bottle of gold ink. Then she went to the candy sellers sitting behind their big round jars 
and she bought six of each kind, pointing at the glass because she could not make herself 
heard over all the shouting: six angel hair, six tinned milk, six sesame seed bars, six 
cassava pastries, six chocolate bars, six blancmanges, six tidbits of the queen, six of this 
and six of that, six of everything, and she tossed them into the maid’s baskets with an 
irresistible grace and a complete detachment from the stormclouds of flies on the syrup, 
from the continual hullabaloo and the vapor of rancid sweat that reverberated in the 
deadly heat. She was awakened from the spell by a good-natured black woman with a 
colored cloth around her head who was round and handsome and offered her a triangle of 
pineapple speared on the tip of a butcher’s knife. She took it, she put it whole into her 
mouth, she tasted it, and was chewing it as her eyes wandered over the crowd, when a 
sudden shock rooted her on the spot. Behind her, so close to her ear that only she could 
hear it in the tumult, she heard his voice: 

“This is not the place for a crowned goddess.” 

She turned her head and saw, a hand’s breadth from her eyes, those other glacial eyes, 
that livid face, those lips petrified with fear, just as she had seen them in the crowd at 
Midnight Mass the first time he was so close to her, but now, instead of the commotion of 
love, she felt the abyss of disenchantment. In an instant the magnitude of her own 
mistake was revealed to her, and she asked herself, appalled, how she could have 
nurtured such a chimera in her heart for so long and with so much ferocity. She just 
managed to think: My God, poor man! Florentino Ariza smiled, tried to say something, 
tried to follow her, but she erased him from her life with a wave of her hand. 

“No, please,” she said to him. “Forget it.” 

That afternoon, while her father was taking his siesta, she sent Gala Placidia with a 
two-line letter: “Today, when I saw you, I realized that what is between us is nothing 
more than an illusion.” The maid also returned his telegrams, his verses, his dry 
camellias, and asked him to send back her letters and gifts, Aunt Escolástica’s missal, the 
veins of leaves from her herbariums, the square centimeter of the habit of St. Peter 
Clavier, the saints’ medals, the braid of her fifteenth year tied with the silk ribbon of her 
school uniform. In the days that followed, on the verge of madness, he wrote her 
countless desperate letters and besieged the maid to take them to her, but she obeyed her 
unequivocal instructions not to accept anything but the returned gifts. She insisted with so 
much zeal that Florentino Ariza sent them all back except the braid, which he would 
return only to Fermina Daza in person so they could talk, if just for a moment. But she 
refused. Fearing a decision fatal to her son, Tránsito Ariza swallowed her pride and asked 
Fermina Daza to grant her the favor of five minutes of her time, and Fermina Daza 
received her for a moment in the doorway of her house, not asking her to sit down, not 
asking her to come in, and without the slightest trace of weakening. Two days later, after 


an argument with his mother, Florentino Ariza took down from the wall of his room the 
stained-glass case where he displayed the braid as if it were a holy relic, and Tránsito 
Ariza herself returned it in the velvet box embroidered with gold thread. Florentino Ariza 
never had another opportunity to see or talk to Fermina Daza alone in the many chance 
encounters of their very long lives until fifty-one years and nine months and four days 
later, when he repeated his vow of eternal fidelity and everlasting love on her first night 
as a widow. 


CHAPTER THREE 

AT THE AGE of twenty-eight, Dr. Juvenal Urbino had been the most desirable of 
bachelors. He had returned from a long stay in Paris, where he had completed advanced 
studies in medicine and surgery, and from the time he set foot on solid ground he gave 
overwhelming indications that he had not wasted a minute of his time. He returned more 
fastidious than when he left, more in control of his nature, and none of his 
contemporaries seemed as rigorous and as learned as he in his science, and none could 
dance better to the music of the day or improvise as well on the piano. Seduced by his 
personal charms and by the certainty of his family fortune, the girls in his circle held 
secret lotteries to determine who would spend time with him, and he gambled, too, on 
being with them, but he managed to keep himself in a state of grace, intact and tempting, 
until he succumbed without resistance to the plebeian charms of Fermina Daza. 

He liked to say that this love was the result of a clinical error. He himself could not 
believe tha t it had happened, least of all at that time in his life when all his reserves of 
passion were concentrated on the destiny of his city which, he said with great frequency 
and no second thoughts, had no equal in the world. In Paris, strolling arm in arm with a 
casual sweetheart through a late autumn, it seemed impossible to imagine a purer 
happiness than those golden afternoons, with the woody odor of chestnuts on the braziers, 
the languid accordions, the insatiable lovers kissing on the open terraces, and still he had 
told himself with his hand on his heart that he was not prepared to exchange all that for a 
single instant of his Caribbean in April. He was still too young to know that the heart’s 
memory eliminates the bad and magnifies the good, and that thanks to this artifice we 
manage to endure the burden of the past. But when he stood at the railing of the ship and 
saw the white promontory of the colonial district again, the motionless buzzards on the 
roofs, the washing of the poor hung out to dry on the balconies, only then did he 
understand to what extent he had been an easy victim to the charitable deceptions of 
nostalgia. 

The ship made its way across the bay through a floating blanket of drowned animals, 
and most of the passengers took refuge in their cabins to escape the stench. The young 
doctor walked down the gangplank dressed in perfect alpaca, wearing a vest and dustcoat, 
with the beard of a young Pasteur and his hair divided by a neat, pale part, and with 
enough self-control to hide the lump in his throat caused not by terror but by sadness. On 
the nearly deserted dock guarded by barefoot soldiers without uniforms, his sisters and 
mother were waiting for him, along with his closest friends, whom he found insipid and 
without expectations despite their sophisticated airs; they spoke about the crisis of the 
civil war as if it were remote and foreign, but they all had an evasive tremor in their 
voices and an uncertainty in their eyes that belied their words. His mother moved him 
most of all. She was still young, a woman who had made a mark on life with her elegance 
and social drive, but who was now slowly withering in the aroma of camphor that rose 
from her widow’s crepe. She must have seen herself in her son’s confusion, and she 
asked in immediate self-defense why his skin was as pale as wax. 


“It’s life over there, Mother,” he said. “You turn green in Paris.” 

A short while later, suffocating with the heat as he sat next to her in the closed carriage, 
he could no longer endure the unmerciful reality that came pouring in through the 
window. The ocean looked like ashes, the old palaces of the marquises were about to 
succumb to a proliferation of beggars, and it was impossible to discern the ardent scent of 
jasmine behind the vapors of death from the open sewers. Everything seemed smaller to 
him than when he left, poorer and sadder, and there were so many hungry rats in the 
rubbish heaps of the streets that the carriage horses stumbled in fright. On the long trip 
from the port to his house, located in the heart of the District of the Viceroys, he found 
nothing that seemed worthy of his nostalgia. Defeated, he turned his head away so that 
his mother would not see, and he began to cry in silence. 

The former palace of the Marquis de Casalduero, historic residence of the Urbino de la 
Calle family, had not escaped the surrounding wreckage. Dr. Juvenal Urbino discovered 
this with a broken heart when he entered the house through the gloomy portico and saw 
the dusty fountain in the interior garden and the wild brambles in flower beds where 
iguanas wandered, and he realized that many marble flagstones were missing and others 
were broken on the huge stairway with its copper railings that led to the principal rooms. 
His father, a physician who was more self-sacrificing than eminent, had died in the 
epidemic of Asian cholera that had devastated the population six years earlier, and with 
him had died the spirit of the house. Doña Blanca, his mother, smothered by mourning 
that was considered eternal, had substituted evening novenas for her dead husband’s 
celebrated lyrical soirées and chamber concerts. His two sisters, despite their natural 
inclinations and festive vocation, were fodder for the convent. 

Dr. Juvenal Urbino did not sleep at all on the night of his return; he was frightened by 
the darkness and the silence, and he said three rosaries to the Holy Spirit and all the 
prayers he could remember to ward off calamities and shipwrecks and all manner of night 
terrors, while a curlew that had come in through a half-closed door sang every hour on 
the hour in his bedroom. He was tormented by the hallucinating screams of the 
madwomen in the Divine Shepherdess Asylum next door, the harsh dripping from the 
water jar into the washbasin which resonated throughout the house, the long-legged steps 
of the curlew wandering in his bedroom, his congenital fear of the dark, and the invisible 
presence of his dead father in the vast, sleeping mansion. When the curlew sang five 
o’clock along with the local roosters, Dr. Juvenal Urbino commended himself body and 
soul to Divine Providence because he did not have the heart to live another day in his 
rubble-strewn homeland. But in time the affection of his family, the Sundays in the 
country, and the covetous attentions of the unmarried women of his class mitigated the 
bitterness of his first impression. Little by little he grew accustomed to the sultry heat of 
October, to the excessive odors, to the hasty judgments of his friends, to the We’ll see 
tomorrow, Doctor, don’t worry, and at last he gave in to the spell of habit. It did not take 
him long to invent an easy justification for his surrender. This was his world, he said to 
himself, the sad, oppressive world that God had provided for him, and he was responsible 
to it. 

The first thing he did was to take possession of his father’s office. He kept in place the 
hard, somber English furniture made of wood that sighed in the icy cold of dawn, but he 
consigned to the attic the treatises on viceregal science and romantic medicine and filled 
the bookshelves behind their glass doors with the writings of the new French school. He 


took down the faded pictures, except for the one of the physician arguing with Death for 
the nude body of a female patient, and the Hippocratic Oath printed in Gothic letters, and 
he hung in their place, next to his father’s only diploma, the many diverse ones he 
himself had received with highest honors from various schools in Europe. 

He tried to impose the latest ideas at Misericordia Hospital, but this was not as easy as 
it had seemed in his youthful enthusiasm, for the antiquated house of health was stubborn 
in its attachment to atavistic superstitions, such as standing beds in pots of water to 
prevent disease from climbing up the legs, or requiring evening wear and chamois gloves 
in the operating room because it was taken for granted that elegance was an essential 
condition for asepsis. They could not tolerate the young newcomer’s tasting a patient’s 
urine to determine the presence of sugar, quoting Charcot and Trousseau as if they were 
his roommates, issuing severe warnings in class against the mortal risks of vaccines while 
maintaining a suspicious faith in the recent invention of suppositories. He was in conflict 
with everything: his renovating spirit, his maniacal sense of civic duty, his slow humor in 
a land of immortal pranksters--everything, in fact, that constituted his most estimable 
virtues provoked the resentment of his older colleagues and the sly jokes of the younger 
ones. 

His obsession was the dangerous lack of sanitation in the city. He appealed to the 
highest authorities to fill in the Spanish sewers that were an immense breeding ground for 
rats, and to build in their place a closed sewage system whose contents would not empty 
into the cove at the market, as had always been the case, but into some distant drainage 
area instead. The well-equipped colonial houses had latrines with septic tanks, but two 
thirds of the popula tion lived in shanties at the edge of the swamps and relieved 
themselves in the open air. The excrement dried in the sun, turned to dust, and was 
inhaled by everyone along with the joys of Christmas in the cool, gentle breezes of 
December. Dr. Juvenal Urbino attempted to force the City Council to impose an 
obligatory training course so that the poor could learn how to build their own latrines. He 
fought in vain to stop them from tossing garbage into the mangrove thickets that over the 
centuries had become swamps of putrefaction, and to have them collect it instead at least 
twice a week and incinerate it in some uninhabited area. 

He was aware of the mortal threat of the drinking water. The mere idea of building an 
aqueduct seemed fantastic, since those who might have supported it had underground 
cisterns at their disposal, where water rained down over the years was collected under a 
thick layer of scum. Among the most valued household articles of the time were carved 
wooden water collectors whose stone filters dripped day and night into large earthen 
water jars. To prevent anyone from drinking from the aluminum cup used to dip out the 
water, its edges were as jagged as the crown of a mock king. The water was crystalline 
and cool in the dark clay, and it tasted of the forest. But Dr. Juvenal Urbino was not taken 
in by these appearances of purity, for he knew that despite all precautions, the bottom of 
each earthen jar was a sanctuary for waterworms. He had spent the slow hours of his 
childhood watching them with an almost mystical astonishment, convinced along with so 
many other people at the time that waterworms were animes, supernatural creatures who, 
from the sediment in still water, courted young maidens and could inflict furious 
vengeance because of love. As a boy he had seen the havoc they had wreaked in the 
house of Lázara Conde, a schoolteacher who dared to rebuff the animes, and he had seen 
the watery trail of glass in the street and the mountain of stones they had thrown at her 


windows for three days and three nights. And so it was a long while before he learned 
that waterworms were in reality the larvae of mosquitoes, but once he learned it he never 
forgot it, because from that moment on he realized that they and many other evil animes 
could pass through our simple stone filters intact. 

For a long time the water in the cisterns had been honored as the cause of the scrotal 
hernia that so many men in the city endured not only without embarrassment but with a 
certain patriotic insolence. When Juvenal Urbino was in elementary school, he could not 
avoid a spasm of horror at the sight of men with ruptures sitting in their doorways on hot 
afternoons, fanning their enormous testicle as if it were a child sleeping between their 
legs. It was said that the hernia whistled like a lugubrious bird on stormy nights and 
twisted in unbearable pain when a buzzard feather was burned nearby, but no one 
complained about those discomforts because a large, well-carried rupture was, more than 
anything else, a display of masculine honor. When Dr. Juvenal Urbino returned from 
Europe he was already well aware of the scientific fallacy in these beliefs, but they were 
so rooted in local superstition that many people opposed the mineral enrichment of the 
water in the cisterns for fear of destroying its ability to cause an honorable rupture. 

Impure water was not all that alarmed Dr. Juvenal Urbino. He was just as concerned 
with the lack of hygiene at the public market, a vast extension of cleared land along LasÁnimas Bay where the sailing ships from the Antilles would dock. An illustrious traveler 
of the period described the market as one of the most varied in the world. It was rich, in 
fact, and profuse and noisy, but also, perhaps, the most alarming of markets. Set on its 
own garbage heap, at the mercy of capricious tides, it was the spot where the bay belched 
filth from the sewers back onto land. The offal from the adjoining slaughterhouse was 
also thrown away there--severed heads, rotting viscera, animal refuse that floated, in 
sunshine and starshine, in a swamp of blood. The buzzards fought for it with the rats and 
the dogs in a perpetual scramble among the deer and succulent capons from Sotavento 
hanging from the eaves of the market stalls, and the spring vegetables from Arjona 
displayed on straw mats spread over the ground. Dr. Urbino wanted to make the place 
sanitary, he wanted a slaughterhouse built somewhere else and a covered market 
constructed with stained-glass turrets, like the one he had seen in the old boquerías in 
Barcelona, where the provisions looked so splendid and clean that it seemed a shame to 
eat them. But even the most complaisant of his notable friends pitied his illusory passion. 
That is how they were: they spent their lives proclaiming their proud origins, the historic 
merits of the city, the value of its relics, its heroism, its beauty, but they were blind to the 
decay of the years. Dr. Juvenal Urbino, on the other hand, loved it enough to see it with 
the eyes of truth. 

“How noble this city must be,” he would say, “for we have spent four hundred years 
trying to finish it off and we still have not succeeded,” 

They almost had, however. The epidemic of cholera morbus, whose first victims were 
struck down in the standing water of the market, had, in eleven weeks, been responsible 
for the greatest death toll in our history. Until that time the eminent dead were interred 
under the flagstones in the churches, in the exclusive vicinity of archbishops and 
capitulars, while the less wealthy were buried in the patios of convents. The poor were 
sent to the colonial cemetery, located on a windy hill that was separated from the city by 
a dry canal whose mortar bridge bore the legend carved there by order of some 
clairvoyant mayor: Lasciate ogni speranza voi ch’entrate. After the first two weeks of the 


cholera epidemic, the cemetery was overflowing and there was no room left in the 
churches despite the fact that they had dispatched the decayed remains of many nameless 
civic heroes to the communal ossuary. The air in the Cathedral grew thin with the vapors 
from badly sealed crypts, and its doors did not open again until three years later, at the 
time that Fermina Daza saw Florentino Ariza at close quarters as she left Midnight Mass. 
By the third week the cloister of the Convent of St. Clare was full all the way to its 
poplar-lined walks, and it was necessary to use the Community’s orchard, which was 
twice as large, as a cemetery. There graves were dug deep enough to bury the dead on 
three levels, without delay and without coffins, but this had to be stopped because the 
brimming ground turned into a sponge that oozed sickening, infected blood at every step. 
Then arrangements were made to continue burying in The Hand of God, a cattle ranch 
less than a league from the city, which was later consecrated as the Universal Cemetery. 

From the time the cholera proclamation was issued, the local garrison shot a cannon 
from the fortress every quarter hour, day and night, in accordance with the local 
superstition that gunpowder purified the atmosphere. The cholera was much more 
devastating to the black population, which was larger and poorer, but in reality it had no 
regard for color or background. It ended as suddenly as it had begun, and the extent of its 
ravages was never known, not because this was impossible to establish but because one 
of our most widespread virtues was a certain reticence concerning personal misfortune. 

Dr. Marco Aurelio Urbino, the father of Juvenal, was a civic hero during that dreadful 
time, as well as its most distinguished victim. By official decree he personally designed 
and directed public health measures, but on his own initiative he intervened to such an 
extent in every social question that during the most critical moments of the plague no 
higher authority seemed to exist. Years later, reviewing the chronicle of those days, Dr. 
Juvenal Urbino confirmed that his father’s methodology had been more charitable than 
scientific and, in many ways, contrary to reason, so that in large measure it had fostered 
the voraciousness of the plague. He confirmed this with the compassion of sons whom 
life has turned, little by little, into the fathers of their fathers, and for the first time he 
regretted not having stood with his father in the solitude of his errors. But he did not 
dispute his merits: his diligence and his self-sacrifice and above all his personal courage 
deserved the many honors rendered him when the city recovered from the disaster, and it 
was with justice that his name was found among those of so many other heroes of less 
honorable wars. 

He did not live to see his own glory. When he recognized in himself the irreversible 
symptoms that he had seen and pitied in others, he did not even attempt a useless struggle 
but withdrew from the world so as not to infect anyone else. Locked in a utility room at 
Misericordia Hospital, deaf to the calls of his colleagues and the pleas of his family, 
removed from the horror of the plague victims dying on the floor in the packed corridors, 
he wrote a letter of feverish love to his wife and children, a letter of gratitude for his 
existence in which he revealed how much and with how much fervor he had loved life. It 
was a farewell of twenty heartrending pages in which the progress of the disease could be 
observed in the deteriorating script, and it was not necessary to know the writer to realize 
that he had signed his name with his last breath. In accordance with his instructions, his 
ashen body was mingled with others in the communal cemetery and was not seen by 
anyone who loved him. 

Three days later, in Paris, Dr. Juvenal Urbino received a telegram during supper with 


friends, and he toasted the memory of his father with champagne. He said: “He was a 
good man.” Later he would reproach himself for his lack of maturity: he had avoided 
reality in order not to cry. But three weeks later he received a copy of the posthumous 
letter, and then he surrendered to the truth. All at once the image of the man he had 
known before he knew any other was revealed to him in all its profundity, the man who 
had raised him and taught him and had slept and fornicated with his mother for thirty-two 
years and yet who, before that letter, had never revealed himself body and soul because 
of timidity, pure and simple. Until then Dr. Juvenal Urbino and his family had conceived 
of death as a misfortune that befell others, other people’s fathers and mothers, other 
people’s brothers and sisters and husbands and wives, but not theirs. They were people 
whose lives were slow, who did not see themselves growing old, or falling sick, or dying, 
but who disappeared little by little in their own time, turning into memories, mists from 
other days, until they were absorbed into oblivion. His father’s posthumous letter, more 
than the telegram with the bad news, hurled him headlong against the certainty of death. 
And yet one of his oldest memories, when he was nine years old perhaps, perhaps when 
he was eleven, was in a way an early sign of death in the person of his father. One rainy 
afternoon the two of them were in the office his father kept in the house; he was drawing 
larks and sunflowers with colored chalk on the tiled floor, and his father was reading by 
the light shining through the window, his vest unbuttoned and elastic armbands on his 
shirt sleeves. Suddenly he stopped reading to scratch his back with a long-handled back 
scratcher that had a little silver hand on the end. Since he could not reach the spot that 
itched, he asked his son to scratch him with his nails, and as the boy did so he had the 
strange sensation of not feeling his own body. At last his father looked at him over his 
shoulder with a sad smile. 

“If I died now,” he said, “you would hardly remember me when you are my age.” 

He said it for no apparent reason, and the angel of death hovered for a moment in the 
cool shadows of the office and flew out again through the window, leaving a trail of 
feathers fluttering in his wake, but the boy did not see them. More than twenty years had 
gone by since then, and Juvenal Urbino would very soon be as old as his father was that 
afternoon. He knew he was identical to him, and to that awareness had now been added 
the awful consciousness that he was also as mortal. 

Cholera became an obsession for him. He did not know much more about it than he 
had learned in a routine manner in some marginal course, when he had found it difficult 
to believe that only thirty years before, it had been responsible for more than one hundred 
forty thousand deaths in France, including Paris. But after the death of his father he 
learned all there was to know about the different forms of cholera, almost as a penance to 
appease his memory, and he studied with the most outstanding epidemiologist of his time 
and the creator of the cordons sanitaires, Professor Adrien Proust, father of the great 
novelist. So that when he returned to his country and smelled the stench of the market 
while he was still out at sea and saw the rats in the sewers and the children rolling naked 
in the puddles on the streets, he not only understood how the tragedy had occurred but 
was certain that it would be repeated at any moment. 

The moment was not long in coming. In less than a year his students at Misericordia 
Hospital asked for his help in treating a charity patient with a strange blue coloration all 
over his body. Dr. Juvenal Urbino had only to see him from the doorway to recognize the 
enemy. But they were in luck: the patient had arrived three days earlier on a schooner 


from Curaçao and had come to the hospital clinic by himself, and it did not seem 
probable that he had infected anyone else. In any event, Dr. Juvenal Urbino alerted his 
colleagues and had the authorities warn the neighboring ports so that they could locate 
and quarantine the contaminated schooner, and he had to restrain the military commander 
of the city who wanted to declare martial law and initiate the therapeutic strategy of firing 
the cannon every quarter hour. 

“Save that powder for when the Liberals come,” he said with good humor. “We are no 
longer in the Middle Ages.” 

The patient died in four days, choked by a grainy white vomit, but in the following 
weeks no other case was discovered despite constant vigilance. A short while later, The 
Commercial Daily published the news that two children had died of cholera in different 
locations in the city. It was learned that one of them had had common dysentery, but the 
other, a girl of five, appeared to have been, in fact, a victim of cholera. Her parents and 
three brothers were separated and placed under individual quarantine, and the entire 
neighborhood was subjected to strict medical supervision. One of the children contracted 
cholera but recovered very soon, and the entire family returned home when the danger 
was over. Eleven more cases were reported in the next three months, and in the fifth there 
was an alarming outbreak, but by the end of the year it was believed that the danger of an 
epidemic had been averted. No one doubted that the sanitary rigor of Dr. Juvenal Urbino, 
more than the efficacy of his pronouncements, had made the miracle possible. From that 
time on, and well into this century, cholera was endemic not only in the city but along 
most of the Caribbean coast and the valley of the Magdalena, but it never again flared 
into an epidemic. The crisis meant that Dr. Juvenal Urbino’s warnings were heard with 
greater serious ness by public officials. They established an obligatory Chair of Cholera 
and Yellow Fever in the Medical School, and realized the urgency of closing up the 
sewers and building a market far from the garbage dump. By that time, however, Dr. 
Urbino was not concerned with proclaiming victory, nor was he moved to persevere in 
his social mission, for at that moment one of his wings was broken, he was distracted and 
in disarray and ready to forget everything else in life, because he had been struck by the 
lightning of his love for Fermina Daza. 

It was, in fact, the result of a clinical error. A physician who was a friend of his thought 
he detected the warning symptoms of cholera in an eighteen-year-old patient, and he 
asked Dr. Juvenal Urbino to see her. He called that very afternoon, alarmed at the 
possibility that the plague had entered the sanctuary of the old city, for all the cases until 
that time had occurred in the poor neighborhoods, and almost all of those among the 
black population. He encountered other, less unpleasant, surprises. From the outside, the 
house, shaded by the almond trees in the Park of the Evangels, appeared to be in ruins, as 
did the others in the colonial district, but inside there was a harmony of beauty and an 
astonishing light that seemed to come from another age. The entrance opened directly 
into a square Sevillian patio that was white with a recent coat of lime and had flowering 
orange trees and the same tiles on the floor as on the walls. There was an invisible sound 
of running water, and pots with carnations on the cornices, and cages of strange birds in 
the arcades. The strangest of all were three crows in a very large cage, who filled the 
patio with an ambiguous perfume every time they flapped their wings. Several dogs, 
chained elsewhere in the house, began to bark, maddened by the scent of a stranger, but a 
woman’s shout stopped them dead, and numerous cats leapt all around the patio and hid 


among the flowers, frightened by the authority in the voice. Then there was such a 
diaphanous silence that despite the disorder of the birds and the syllables of water on 
stone, one could hear the desolate breath of the sea. 

Shaken by the conviction that God was present, Dr. Juvenal Urbino thought that such a 
house was immune to the plague. He followed Gala Placidia along the arcaded corridor, 
passed by the window of the sewing room where Florentino Ariza had seen Fermina 
Daza for the first time, when the patio was still a shambles, climbed the new marble stairs 
to the second floor, and waited to be announced before going into the patient’s bedroom. 
But Gala Placidia came out again with a message: 

“The señorita says you cannot come in now because her papa is not at home.” 

And so he returned at five in the afternoon, in accordance with the maid’s instructions, 
and Lorenzo Daza himself opened the street door and led him to his daughter’s bedroom. 
There he remained, sitting in a dark corner with his arms folded, and making futile efforts 
to control his ragged breathing during the examination. It was not easy to know who was 
more constrained, the doctor with his chaste touch or the patient in the silk chemise with 
her virgin’s modesty, but neither one looked the other in the eye; instead, he asked 
questions in an impersonal voice and she responded in a tremulous voice, both of them 
very conscious of the man sitting in the shadows. At last Dr. Juvenal Urbino asked the 
patient to sit up, and with exquisite care he opened her nightdress down to the waist; her 
pure high breasts with the childish nipples shone for an instant in the darkness of the 
bedroom, like a flash of gunpowder, before she hurried to cover them with crossed arms. 
Imperturbable, the physician opened her arms without looking at her and examined her 
by direct auscultation, his ear against her skin, first the chest and then the back. 

Dr. Juvenal Urbino used to say that he experienced no emotion when he met the 
woman with whom he would live until the day of his death. He remembered the sky-blue 
chemise edged in lace, the feverish eyes, the long hair hanging loose over her shoulders, 
but he was so concerned with the outbreak of cholera in the colonial district that he took 
no notice of her flowering adolescence: he had eyes only for the slightest hint that she 
might be a victim of the plague. She was more explicit: the young doctor she had heard 
so much about in connection with the cholera epidemic seemed a pedant incapable of 
loving anyone but himself. The diagnosis was an intestinal infection of alimentary origin, 
which was cured by three days of treatment at home. Relieved by this proof that his 
daughter had not contracted cholera, Lorenzo Daza accompanied Dr. Juvenal Urbino to 
the door of his carriage, paid him a gold peso for the visit, a fee that seemed excessive 
even for a physician to the rich, and he said goodbye with immoderate expressions of 
gratitude. He was overwhelmed by the splendor of the Doctor’s family names, and he not 
only did not hide it but would have done anything to see him again, under less formal 
circumstances. 

The case should have been considered closed. But on Tuesday of the following week, 
without being called and with no prior announcement, Dr. Juvenal Urbino returned to the 
house at the inconvenient hour of three in the afternoon. Fermina Daza was in the sewing 
room, having a lesson in oil painting with two of her friends, when he appeared at the 
window in his spotless white frock coat and his white top hat and signaled to her to come 
over to him. She put her palette down on a chair and tiptoed to the window, her ruffled 
skirt raised to keep it from dragging on the floor. She wore a diadem with a jewel that 
hung on her forehead, and the luminous stone was the same aloof color as her eyes, and 


everything in her breathed an aura of coolness. The Doctor was struck by the fact that she 
was dressed for painting at home as if she were going to a party. He took her pulse 
through the open window, he had her stick out her tongue, he examined her throat with an 
aluminum tongue depressor, he looked inside her lower eyelids, and each time he nodded 
in approval. He was less inhibited than on the previous visit, but she was more so, 
because she could not understand the reason for the unexpected examination if he himself 
had said that he would not come back unless they called him because of some change. 
And even more important: she did not ever want to see him again. When he finished his 
examination, the Doctor put the tongue depressor back into his bag, crowded with 
instruments and bottles of medicine, and closed it with a resounding snap. 

“You are like a new-sprung rose,” he said. 

“Thank you.” 

“Thank God,” he said, and he misquoted St. Thomas: “Remember that everything that 
is good, whatever its origin, comes from the Holy Spirit. Do you like music?” 

“What is the point of that question?” she asked in turn. 

“Music is important for one’s health,” he said. 

He really thought it was, and she was going to know very soon, and for the rest of her 
life, that the topic of music was almost a magic formula that he used to propose 
friendship, but at that moment she interpreted it as a joke. Besides, her two friends, who 
had pretended to paint while she and Dr. Juvenal Urbino were talking at the window, 
tittered and hid their faces behind their palettes, and this made Fermina Daza lose her 
self-control. Blind with fury, she slammed the window shut. The Doctor stared at the 
sheer lace curtains in bewilderment, he tried to find the street door but lost his way, and 
in his confusion he knocked into the cage with the perfumed crows. They broke into 
sordid shrieking, flapped their wings in fright, and saturated the Doctor’s clothing with a 
feminine fragrance. The thundering voice of Lorenzo Daza rooted him to the spot: 

“Doctor--wait for me there.” 

He had seen everything from the upper floor and, swollen and livid, he came down the 
stairs buttoning his shirt, his side-whiskers still in an uproar after a restless siesta. The 
Doctor tried to overcome his embarrassment. 

“I told your daughter that she is like a rose.” 

“True enough,” said Lorenzo Daza, “but one with too many thorns.” 

He walked past Dr. Urbino without greeting him. He pushed open the sewing room 
window and shouted a rough command to his daughter: 

“Come here and beg the Doctor’s pardon.” 

The Doctor tried to intervene and stop him, but Lorenzo Daza paid no attention to him. 
He insisted: “Hurry up.” She looked at her friends with a secret plea for understanding, 
and she said to her father that she had nothing to beg pardon for, she had only closed the 
window to keep out the sun. Dr. Urbino, with good humor, tried to confirm her words, 
but Lorenzo Daza insisted that he be obeyed. Then Fermina Daza, pale with rage, turned 
toward the window, and extending her right foot as she raised her skirt with her 
fingertips, she made a theatrical curtsy to the Doctor. 

“I give you my most heartfelt apologies, sir,” she said. 

Dr. Juvenal Urbino imitated her with good humor, making a cavalier’s flourish with his 
top hat, but he did not win the compassionate smile he had hoped for. Then Lorenzo Daza 
invited him to have a cup of coffee in his office to set things right, and he accepted with 


pleasure so that there would be no doubt whatsoever that he did not harbor a shred of 
resentment in his heart. 

The truth was that Dr. Juvenal Urbino did not drink coffee, except for a cup first thing 
in the morning. He did not drink alcohol either, except for a glass of wine with meals on 
solemn occasions, but he not only drank down the coffee that Lorenzo Daza offered him, 
he also accepted a glass of anisette. Then he accepted another coffee with another 
anisette, and then another and another, even though he still had to make a few more calls. 
At first he listened with attention to the excuses that Lorenzo Daza continued to offer in 
the name of his daughter, whom he defined as an intelligent and serious girl, worthy of a 
prince whether he came from here or anywhere else, whose only defect, so he said, was 
her mulish character. But after the second anisette, the Doctor thought he heard Fermina 
Daza’s voice at the other end of the patio, and his imagination went after her, followed 
her through the night that had just descended in the house as she lit the lights in the 
corridor, fumigated the bedrooms with the insecticide bomb, uncovered the pot of soup 
on the stove, which she was going to share that night with her father, the two of them 
alone at the table, she not raising her eyes, not tasting the soup, not breaking the 
rancorous spell, until he was forced to give in and ask her to forgive his severity that 
afternoon. 

Dr. Urbino knew enough about women to realize that Fermina Daza would not pass by 
the office until he left, but he stayed nevertheless because he felt that wounded pride 
would give him no peace after the humiliations of the afternoon. Lorenzo Daza, who by 
now was almost drunk, did not seem to notice his lack of attention, for he was satisfied 
with his own indomitable eloquence. He talked at full gallop, chewing the flower of his 
unlit cigar, coughing in shouts, trying to clear his throat, attempting with great difficulty 
to find a comfortable position in the swivel chair, whose springs wailed like an animal in 
heat. He had drunk three glasses of anisette to each one drunk by his guest, and he paused 
only when he realized that they could no longer see each other, and he stood up to light 
the lamp. Dr. Juvenal Urbino looked at him in the new light, he saw that one eye was 
twisted like a fish’s and that his words did not correspond to the movement of his lips, 
and he thought these were hallucinations brought on by his abuse of alcohol. Then he 
stood up, with the fascinating sensation that he was inside a body that belonged not to 
him but to someone who was still in the chair where he had been sitting, and he had to 
make a great effort not to lose his mind. 

It was after seven o’clock when he left the office, preceded by Lorenzo Daza. There 
was a full moon. The patio, idealized by anisette, floated at the bottom of an aquarium, 
and the cages covered with cloths looked like ghosts sleeping under the hot scent of new 
orange blossoms. The sewing room window was open, there was a lighted lamp on the 
worktable, and the unfinished paintings were on their easels as if they were on exhibit. 
“Where art thou that thou art not here,” said Dr. Urbino as he passed by, but Fermina 
Daza did not hear him, she could not hear him, because she was crying with rage in her 
bedroom, lying face down on the bed and waiting for her father so that she could make 
him pay for the afternoon’s humiliation. The Doctor did not renounce his hope of saying 
goodbye to her, but Lorenzo Daza did not suggest it. He yearned for the innocence of her 
pulse, her cat’s tongue, her tender tonsils, but he was disheartened by the idea that she 
never wanted to see him again and would never permit him to try to see her. When 
Lorenzo Daza walked into the entryway, the crows, awake under their sheets, emitted a 


funereal shriek. “They will peck out your eyes,” the Doctor said aloud, thinking of her, 

and Lorenzo Daza turned around to ask him what he had said. 

“It was not me,” he said. “It was the anisette.” 

Lorenzo Daza accompanied him to his carriage, trying to force him to accept a gold 
peso for the second visit, but he would not take it. He gave the correct instructions to the 
driver for taking him to the houses of the two patients he still had to see, and he climbed 
into the carriage without help. But he began to feel sick as they bounced along the 
cobbled streets, so that he ordered the driver to take a different route. He looked at 
himself for a moment in the carriage mirror and saw that his image, too, was still thinking 
about Fermina Daza. He shrugged his shoulders. Then he belched, lowered his head to 
his chest, and fell asleep, and in his dream he began to hear funeral bells. First he heard 
those of the Cathedral and then he heard those of all the other churches, one after another, 
even the cracked pots of St. Julian the Hospitaler. 

“Shit,” he murmured in his sleep, “the dead have died.” His mother and sisters were 
having café con leche and crullers for supper at the formal table in the large dining room 
when they saw him appear in the door, his face haggard and his entire being dishonored 
by the whorish perfume of the crows. The largest bell of the adjacent Cathedral 
resounded in the immense empty space of the house. His mother asked him in alarm 
where in the world he had been, for they had looked everywhere for him so that he could 
attend General Ignacio María, the last grandson of the Marquis de Jaraíz de la Vera, who 
had been struck down that afternoon by a cerebral hemorrhage: it was for him that the 
bells were tolling. Dr. Juvenal Urbino listened to his mother without hearing her as he 
clutched the doorframe, and then he gave a half turn, trying to reach his bedroom, but he 
fell flat on his face in an explosion of star anise vomit. 

“Mother of God,” shouted his mother. “Something very strange must have happened 
for you to show up in your own house in this state.” 

The strangest thing, however, had not yet occurred. Taking advantage of the visit of the 
famous pianist Romeo Lussich, who played a cycle of Mozart sonatas as soon as the city 
had recovered from mourning the death of General Ignacio María, Dr. Juvenal Urbino 
had the piano from the Music School placed in a mule-drawn wagon and brought a 
history-making serenade to Fermina Daza. She was awakened by the first measures, and 
she did not have to look out the grating on the balcony to know who was the sponsor of 
that uncommon tribute. The only thing she regretted was not having the courage of other 
harassed maidens, who emptied their chamber pots on the heads of unwanted suitors. 
Lorenzo Daza, on the other hand, dressed without delay as the serenade was playing, and 
when it was over he had Dr. Juvenal Urbino and the pianist, still wearing their formal 
concert clothes, come in to the visitors’ parlor, where he thanked them for the serenade 
with a glass of good brandy. 

Fermina Daza soon realized that her father was trying to soften her heart. The day after 
the serenade, he said to her in a casual manner: “Imagine how your mother would feel if 
she knew you were being courted by an Urbino de la Calle.” Her dry response was: “She 
would turn over in her grave.” The friends who painted with her told her that Lorenzo 
Daza had been invited to lunch at the Social Club by Dr. Juvenal Urbino, who had 
received a severe reprimand for breaking club rules. It was only then that she learned that 
her father had applied for membership in the Social Club on several occasions, and that 
each time he had been rejected with such a large number of black balls that another 


attempt was not possible. But Lorenzo Daza had an infinite capacity for assimilating 
humiliations, and he continued his ingenious strategies for arranging casual encounters 
with Juvenal Urbino, not realizing that it was Juvenal Urbino who went out of his way to 
let himself be encountered. At times they spent hours chatting in the office, while the 
house seemed suspended at the edge of time because Fermina Daza would not permit 
anything to run its normal course until he left. The Parish Café was a good intermediate 
haven. It was there that Lorenzo Daza gave Juvenal Urbino his first lessons in chess, and 
he was such a diligent pupil that chess became an incurable addiction that tormented him 
until the day of his death. 

One night, a short while after the serenade by solo piano, Lorenzo Daza discovered a 
letter, its envelope sealed with wax, in the entryway to his house. It was addressed to his 
daughter and the monogram “J.U.C.” was imprinted on the seal. He slipped it under the 
door as he passed Fermina’s bedroom, and she never understood how it had come there, 
since it was inconceivable to her that her father had changed so much that he would bring 
her a letter from a suitor. She left it on the night table, for the truth was she did not know 
what to do with it, and there it stayed, unopened, for several days, until one rainy 
afternoon when Fermina Daza dreamed that Juvenal Urbino had returned to the house to 
give her the tongue depressor he had used to examine her throat. In the dream, the tongue 
depressor was made not of aluminum but of a delicious metal that she had tasted with 
pleasure in other dreams, so that she broke it in two unequal pieces and gave him the 
smaller one. 

When she awoke she opened the letter. It was brief and proper, and all that Juvenal 
Urbino asked was permission to request her father’s permission to visit her. She was 
impressed by its simplicity and seriousness, and the rage she had cultivated with so much 
love for so many days faded away on the spot. She kept the letter in the bottom of her 
trunk, but she remembered that she had also kept Florentino Ariza’s perfumed letters 
there, and she took it out of the chest to find another place for it, shaken by a rush of 
shame. Then it seemed that the most decent thing to do was to pretend she had not 
received it, and she burned it in the lamp, watching how the drops of wax exploded into 
blue bubbles above the flame. She sighed: “Poor man.” And then she realized that it was 
the second time she had said those words in little more than a year, and for a moment she 
thought about Florentino Ariza, and even she was surprised at how removed he was from 
her life: poor man. 

Three more letters arrived with the last rains in October, the first of them accompanied 
by a little box of violet pastilles from Flavigny Abbey. Two had been delivered at the 
door by Dr. Juvenal Urbino’s coachman, and the Doctor had greeted Gala Placidia from 
the carriage window, first so that there would be no doubt that the letters were his, and 
second so that no one could tell him they had not been received. Moreover, both of them 
were sealed with his monogram in wax and written in the cryptic scrawl that Fermina 
Daza already recognized as a physician’s handwriting. Both of them said in substance 
what had been said in the first, and were conceived in the same submissive spirit, but 
underneath their propriety one could begin to detect an impatience that was never evident 
in the parsimonious letters of Florentino Ariza. Fermina Daza read them as soon as they 
were delivered, two weeks apart, and without knowing why, she changed her mind as she 
was about to throw them into the fire. But she never thought of answering them. 

The third letter in October had been slipped under the street door, and was in every 


way different from the previous ones. The handwriting was so childish that there was no 
doubt it had been scrawled with the left hand, but Fermina Daza did not realize that until 
the text itself proved to be a poison pen letter. Whoever had written it took for granted 
that Fermina Daza had bewitched Dr. Juvenal Urbino with her love potions, and from that 
supposition sinister conclusions had been drawn. It ended with a threat: if Fermina Daza 
did not renounce her efforts to move up in the world by means of the most desirable man 
in the city, she would be exposed to public disgrace. 

She felt herself the victim of a grave injustice, but her reaction was not vindictive. On 
the contrary: she would have liked to discover who the author of the anonymous letter 
was in order to convince him of his error with all the pertinent explanations, for she felt 
certain that never, for any reason, would she respond to the wooing of Juvenal Urbino. In 
the days that followed she received two more unsigned letters, as perfidious as the first, 
but none of the three seemed to be written by the same person. Either she was the victim 
of a plot, or the false version of her secret love affair had gone further than anyone could 
imagine. She was disturbed by the idea that it was all the result of a simple indiscretion 
on the part of Juvenal Urbino. It occurred to her that perhaps he was different from his 
worthy appearance, that perhaps he talked too much when he was making house calls and 
boasted of imaginary conquests, as did so many other men of his class. She thought about 
writing him a letter to reproach him for the insult to her honor, but then she decided 
against the idea because that might be just what he wanted. She tried to learn more from 
the friends who painted with her in the sewing room, but they had heard only benign 
comments concerning the serenade by solo piano. She felt furious, impotent, humiliated. 
In contrast to her initial feeling that she wanted to meet with her invisible enemy in order 
to convince him of his errors, now she only wanted to cut him to ribbons with the pruning 
shears. She spent sleepless nights analyzing details and phrases in the anonymous letters 
in the hope of finding some shred of comfort. It was a vain hope: Fermina Daza was, by 
nature, alien to the inner world of the Urbino de la Calle family, and she had weapons for 
defending herself from their good actions but not from their evil ones. 

This conviction became even more bitter after the fear caused by the black doll that 
was sent to her without any letter, but whose origin seemed easy to imagine: only Dr. 
Juvenal Urbino could have sent it. It had been bought in Martinique, according to the 
original tag, and it was dressed in an exquisite gown, its hair rippled with gold threads, 
and it closed its eyes when it was laid down. It seemed so charming to Fermina Daza that 
she overcame her scruples and laid it on her pillow during the day and grew accustomed 
to sleeping with it at night. After a time, however, she discovered when she awoke from 
an exhausting dream that the doll was growing: the original exquisite dress she had 
arrived in was up above her thighs, and her shoes had burst from the pressure of her feet. 
Fermina Daza had heard of African spells, but none as frightening as this. On the other 
hand, she could not imagine that a man like Juvenal Urbino would be capable of such an 
atrocity. She was right: the doll had been brought not by his coachman but by an itinerant 
shrimpmonger whom no one knew. Trying to solve the enigma, Fermina Daza thought 
for a moment of Florentino Ariza, whose depressed condition caused her dismay, but life 
convinced her of her error. The mystery was never clarified, and just thinking about it 
made her shudder with fear long after she was married and had children and thought of 
herself as destiny’s darling: the happiest woman in the world. 

Dr. Urbino’s last resort was the mediation of Sister Franca de la Luz, Superior of the 


Academy of the Presentation of the Blessed Virgin, who could not deny the request of a 
family that had supported her Community since its establishment in the Americas. She 
appeared one morning at nine o’clock in the company of a novice, and for half an hour 
the two of them had to amuse themselves with the birdcages while Fermina Daza finished 
her bath. She was a masculine German with a metallic accent and an imperious gaze that 
had no relationship to her puerile passions. Fermina Daza hated her and everything that 
had to do with her more than anything in this world, and the mere memory of her false 
piety made scorpions crawl in her belly. Just the sight of her from the bathroom door was 
enough to revive the torture of school, the unbearable boredom of daily Mass, the terror 
of examinations, the servile diligence of the novices, all of that life distorted by the prism 
of spiritual poverty. Sister Franca de la Luz, on the other hand, greeted her with a joy that 
seemed sincere. She was surprised at how much she had grown and matured, and she 
praised the good judgment with which she managed the house, the good taste evident in 
the patio, the brazier filled with orange blossoms. She ordered the novice to wait for her 
without getting too close to the crows, who in a careless moment might peck out her eyes, 
and she looked for a private spot where she could sit down and talk alone with Fermina, 
who invited her into the drawing room. 

It was a brief and bitter visit. Sister Franca de la Luz, wasting no time on formalities, 
offered honorable reinstatement to Fermina Daza. The reason for her expulsion would be 
erased not only from the records but also from the memory of the Community, and this 
would allow her to finish her studies and receive her baccalaureate degree. Fermina Daza 
was perplexed and wanted to know why. 

“It is the request of someone who deserves everything he desires and whose only wish 
is to make you happy,” said the nun. “Do you know who that is?” 

Then she understood. She asked herself with what authority a woman who had made 
her life miserable because of an innocent letter served as the emissary of love, but she did 
not dare to speak of it. Instead she said yes, she knew that man, and by the same token 
she also knew that he had no right to interfere in her life. 

“All he asks is that you allow him to speak with you for five minutes,” said the nun. “I 
am certain your father will agree.” 

Fermina Daza’s anger grew more intense at the idea that her father was an accessory to 
the visit. 

“We saw each other twice when I was sick,” she said. “Now there is no reason for us to 
see each other again.” 

“For any woman with a shred of sense, that man is a gift from Divine Providence,” said 
the nun. 

She continued to speak of his virtues, of his devotion, of his dedication to serving those 
in pain. As she spoke she pulled from her sleeve a gold rosary with Christ carved in 
marble, and dangled it in front of Fermina Daza’s eyes. It was a family heirloom, more 
than a hundred years old, carved by a goldsmith from Siena and blessed by Clement IV. 

“It is yours,” she said. 

Fermina Daza felt the blood pounding through her veins, and then she dared. 

“I do not understand how you can lend yourself to this,” she said, “if you think that 
love is a sin.” 

Sister Franca de la Luz pretended not to notice the remark, but her eyelids flamed. She 
continued to dangle the rosary in front of Fermina Daza’s eyes. 


“It would be better for you to come to an understanding with me,” she said, “because 
after me comes His Grace the Archbishop, and it is a different story with him.” 

“Let him come,” said Fermina Daza. 

Sister Franca de la Luz tucked the gold rosary into her sleeve. Then from the other she 
took a well-used handkerchief squeezed into a ball and held it tight in her fist, looking at 
Fermina Daza from a great distance and with a smile of commiseration. 

“My poor child,” she sighed, “you are still thinking about that man.” 

Fermina Daza chewed on the impertinence as she looked at the nun without blinking, 
looked her straight in the eye without speaking, chewing in silence, until she saw with 
infinite satisfaction that those masculine eyes had filled with tears. Sister Franca de la 
Luz dried them with the ball of the handkerchief and stood up. 

“Your father is right when he says that you are a mule,” she said. 

The Archbishop did not come. So the siege might have ended that day if Hildebranda 
Sánchez had not arrived to spend Christmas with her cousin, and life changed for both of 
them. They met her on the schooner from Riohacha at five o’clock in the morning, 
surrounded by a crowd of passengers half dead from seasickness, but she walked off the 
boat radiant, very much a woman, and excited after the bad night at sea. She arrived with 
crates of live turkeys and all the fruits of her fertile lands so that no one would lack for 
food during her visit. Lisímaco Sánchez, her father, sent a message asking if they needed 
musicians for their holiday parties, because he had the best at his disposal, and he 
promised to send a load of fireworks later on. He also announced that he could not come 
for his daughter before March, so there was plenty of time for them to enjoy life. The two 
cousins began at once. From the first afternoon they bathed together, naked, the two of 
them making their reciprocal ablutions with water from the cistern. They soaped each 
other, they removed each other’s nits, they compared their buttocks, their quiet breasts, 
each looking at herself in the other’s mirror to judge with what cruelty time had treated 
them since the last occasion when they had seen each other undressed. Hildebranda was 
large and solid, with golden skin, but all the hair on her body was like a mulatta’s, as 
short and curly as steel wool. Fermina Daza, on the other hand, had a pale nakedness, 
with long lines, serene skin, and straight hair. Gala Placidia had two identical beds placed 
in the bedroom, but at times they lay together in one and talked in the dark until dawn. 
They smoked long, thin highwaymen’s cigars that Hildebranda had hidden in the lining 
of her trunk, and afterward they had to burn Armenian paper to purify the rank smell they 
left behind in the bedroom. Fermina Daza had smoked for the first time in Valledupar, 
and had continued in Fonseca and Riohacha, where as many as ten cousins would lock 
themselves in a room to talk about men and to smoke. She learned to smoke backward, 
with the lit end in her mouth, the way men smoked at night during the wars so that the 
glow of their cigarettes would not betray them. But she had never smoked alone. With 
Hildebranda in her house, she smoked every night before going to sleep, and it was then 
that she acquired the habit although she always hid it, even from her husband and her 
children, not only because it was thought improper for a woman to smoke in public but 
because she associated the pleasure with secrecy. 

Hildebranda’s trip had also been imposed by her parents in an effort to put distance 
between her and her impossible love, although they wanted her to think that it was to help 
Fermina decide on a good match. Hildebranda had accepted, hoping to mock 
forgetfulness as her cousin had done before her, and she had arranged with the telegraph 


operator in Fonseca to send her messages with the greatest prudence. And that is why her 
disillusion was so bitter when she learned that Fermina Daza had rejected Florentino 
Ariza. Moreover, Hildebranda had a universal conception of love, and she believed that 
whatever happened to one love affected all other loves throughout the world. Still, she 
did not renounce her plan. With an audacity that caused a crisis of dismay in Fermina 
Daza, she went to the telegraph office alone, intending to win the favor of Florentino 
Ariza. 

She would not have recognized him, for there was nothing about him that corresponded 
to the image she had formed from Fermina Daza. At first glance it seemed impossible 
that her cousin could have been on the verge of madness because of that almost invisible 
clerk with his air of a whipped dog, whose clothing, worthy of a rabbi in disgrace, and 
whose solemn manner could not perturb anyone’s heart. But she soon repented of her 
first impression, for Florentino Ariza placed himself at her unconditional service without 
knowing who she was: he never found out. No one could have understood her as he did, 
so that he did not ask for identification or even for her address. His solution was very 
simple: she would pass by the telegraph office on Wednesday afternoons so that he could 
place her lover’s answers in her hand, and nothing more. And yet when he read the 
written message that Hildebranda brought him, he asked if she would accept a 
suggestion, and she agreed. Florentino Ariza first made some corrections between the 
lines, erased them, rewrote them, had no more room, and at last tore up the page and 
wrote a completely new message that she thought very touching. When she left the 
telegraph office, Hildebranda was on the verge of tears. 

“He is ugly and sad,” she said to Fermina Daza, “but he is all love.” 

What most struck Hildebranda was her cousin’s solitude. She seemed, she told her, an 
old maid of twenty. Accustomed to large scattered families in houses where no one was 
certain how many people were living or eating at any given time, Hildebranda could not 
imagine a girl her age reduced to the cloister of a private life. That was true: from the 
time she awoke at six in the morning until she turned out the light in the bedroom, 
Fermina Daza devoted herself to killing time. Life was imposed on her from outside. 
First, at the final rooster crow, the milkman woke her with his rapping on the door 
knocker. Then came the knock of the fishwife with her box of red snappers dying on a 
bed of algae, the sumptuous fruit sellers with vegetables from María la Baja and fruit 
from San Jacinto. And then, for the rest of the day, everyone knocked at the door: 
beggars, girls with lottery tickets, the Sisters of Charity, the knife grinder with the gossip, 
the man who bought bottles, the man who bought old gold, the man who bought 
newspapers, the fake gypsies who offered to read one’s destiny in cards, in the lines of 
one’s palm, in coffee grounds, in the water in washbasins. Gala Placidia spent the week 
opening and closing the street door to say no, another day, or shouting from the balcony 
in a foul humor to stop bothering us, damn it, we already bought everything we need. She 
had replaced Aunt Escolástica with so much fervor and so much grace that Fermina 
confused them to the point of loving her. She had the obsessions of a slave. Whenever 
she had free time she would go to the workroom to iron the linens; she kept them perfect, 
she kept them in cupboards with lavender, and she ironed and folded not only what she 
had just washed but also what might have lost its brightness through disuse. With the 
same care she continued to maintain the wardrobe of Fermina Sánchez, Fermina’s 
mother, who had died fourteen years before. But Fermina Daza was the one who made 


the decisions. She ordered what they would eat, what they would buy, what had to be 
done in every circumstance, and in that way she determined the life in a house where in 
reality nothing had to be determined. When she finished washing the cages and feeding 
the birds, and making certain that the flowers wanted for nothing, she was at a loss. 
Often, after she was expelled from school, she would fall asleep at siesta and not wake up 
until the next day. The painting classes were only a more amusing way to kill time. 

Her relationship with her father had lacked affection since the expulsion of Aunt 
Escolástica, although they had found the way to live together without bothering each 
other. When she awoke, he had already gone to his business. He rarely missed the ritual 
of lunch, although he almost never ate, for the aperitifs and Galician appetizers at the 
Parish Café satisfied him. He did not eat supper either: they left his meal on the table, 
everything on one plate covered by another, although they knew that he would not eat it 
until the next day when it was reheated for his breakfast. Once a week he gave his 
daughter money for expenses, which he calculated with care and she administered with 
rigor, but he listened with pleasure to any request she might make for unforeseen 
expenses. He never questioned a penny she spent, he never asked her for any 
explanations, but she behaved as if she had to make an accounting before the Tribunal of 
the Holy Office. He had never spoken to her about the nature or condition of his business, 
and he had never taken her to his offices in the port, which were in a location forbidden 
to decent young ladies even if accompanied by their fathers. Lorenzo Daza did not come 
home before ten o’clock at night, which was the curfew hour during the less critical 
periods of the wars. Until that time he would stay at the Parish Café, playing one game or 
another, for he was an expert in all salon games and a good teacher as well. He always 
came home sober, not disturbing his daughter, despite the fact that he had his first 
anisette when he awoke and continued chewing the end of his unlit cigar and drinking at 
regular intervals throughout the day. One night, however, Fermina heard him come in. 
She heard his cossack’s step on the stair, his heavy breathing in the second-floor hallway, 
his pounding with the flat of his hand on her bedroom door. She opened it, and for the 
first time she was frightened by his twisted eye and the slurring of his words. 

“We are ruined,” he said. “Total ruin, so now you know.” 

That was all he said, and he never said it again, and nothing happened to indicate 
whether he had told the truth, but after that night Fermina Daza knew that she was alone 
in the world. She lived in a social limbo. Her former schoolmates were in a heaven that 
was closed to her, above all after the dishonor of her expulsion, and she was not a 
neighbor to her neighbors, because they had known her without a past, in the uniform of 
the Academy of the Presentation of the Blessed Virgin. Her father’s world was one of 
traders and stevedores, of war refugees in the public shelter of the Parish Café, of solitary 
men. In the last year the painting classes had alleviated her seclusion somewhat, for the 
teacher preferred group classes and would bring the other pupils to the sewing room. But 
they were girls of varying and undefined social circumstances, and for Fermina Daza they 
were no more than borrowed friends whose affection ended with each class. Hildebranda 
wanted to open the house, air it, bring in her father’s musicians and fireworks and castles 
of gunpowder, and have a Carnival dance whose gale winds would clear out her cousin’s 
moth-eaten spirit, but she soon realized that her proposals were to no avail, and for a very 
simple reason: there was no one to invite. 

In any case, it was she who thrust Fermina Daza into life. In the afternoon, after the 


painting classes, she allowed herself to be taken out to see the city. Fermina Daza showed 
her the route she had taken every day with Aunt Escolástica, the bench in the little park 
where Florentino Ariza pretended to read while he waited for her, the narrow streets 
along which he followed her, the hiding places for their letters, the sinister palace where 
the prison of the Holy Office had been located, later restored and converted into the 
Academy of the Presentation of the Blessed Virgin, which she hated with all her soul. 
They climbed the hill of the paupers’ cemetery, where Florentino Ariza played the violin 
according to the direction of the winds so that she could listen to him in bed, and from 
there they viewed the entire historic city, the broken roofs and the decaying walls, the 
rubble of fortresses among the brambles, the trail of islands in the bay, the hovels of the 
poor around the swamps, the immense Caribbean. 

On Christmas Eve they went to Midnight Mass in the Cathedral. Fermina sat where she 
used to hear Florent ino Ariza’s confidential music with greatest clarity, and she showed 
her cousin the exact spot where, on a night like this, she had seen his frightened eyes up 
close for the first time. They ventured alone as far as the Arcade of the Scribes, they 
bought sweets, they were amused in the shop that sold fancy paper, and Fermina Daza 
showed her cousin the place where she suddenly discovered that her love was nothing 
more than an illusion. She herself had not realized that every step she took from her 
house to school, every spot in the city, every moment of her recent past, did not seem to 
exist except by the grace of Florentino Ariza. Hildebranda pointed this out to her, but she 
did not admit it because she never would have admitted that Florentino Ariza, for better 
or for worse, was the only thing that had ever happened to her in her life. 

It was during this time that a Belgian photographer came to the city and set up his 
studio at the end of the Arcade of the Scribes, and all those with the money to pay took 
advantage of the opportunity to have their pictures taken. Fermina and Hildebranda were 
among the first. They emptied Fermina Sanchez’s clothes closet, they shared the finest 
dresses, the parasols, the party shoes, the hats, and they dressed as midcentury ladies. 
Gala Placidia helped them lace up the corsets, she showed them how to move inside the 
wire frames of the hoop skirts, how to wear the gloves, how to button the high-heeled 
boots. Hildebranda preferred a broad-brimmed hat with ostrich feathers that hung down 
over her shoulder. Fermina wore a more recent model decorated with painted plaster fruit 
and crinoline flowers. At last they giggled when they looked in the mirror and saw the 
resemblance to the daguerreotypes of their grandmothers, and they went off happy, 
laughing for all they were worth, to have the photograph of their lives taken. Gala 
Placidia watched from the balcony as they crossed the park with their parasols open, 
tottering on their high heels and pushing against the hoop skirts with their bodies as if 
they were children’s walkers, and she gave them her blessing so that God would help 
them in their portraits. 

There was a mob in front of the Belgian’s studio because photographs were being 
taken of Beny Centeno, who had won the boxing championship in Panama. He wore his 
boxing trunks and his boxing gloves and his crown, and it was not easy to photograph 
him because he had to hold a fighting stance for a whole minute and breathe as little as 
possible, but as soon as he put up his guard, his fans burst into cheers and he could not 
resist the temptation to please them by showing off his skill. When it was the cousins’ 
turn, the sky had clouded over and rain seemed imminent, but they allowed their faces to 
be powdered with starch and they leaned against an alabaster column with such ease that 


they remained motionless for more time than seemed reasonable. It was an immortal 
portrait. When Hildebranda died on her ranch at Flores de María, when she was almost 
one hundred years old, they found her copy locked in the bedroom closet, hidden among 
the folds of the perfumed sheets along with the fossil of a thought in a letter that had 
faded with time. For many years Fermina Daza kept hers on the first page of a family 
album, then it disappeared without anyone’s knowing how, or when, and came into the 
possession of Florentino Ariza, through a series of unbelievable coincidences, when they 
were both over sixty years old. 

When Fermina and Hildebranda came out of the Belgian’s studio, there were so many 
people in the plaza across from the Arcade of the Scribes that even the balconies were 
crowded. They had forgotten that their faces were white with starch and that their lips 
were painted with a chocolate-colored salve and that their clothes were not appropriate to 
the time of day or the age. The street greeted them with catcalls and mockery. They were 
cornered, trying to escape public derision, when the landau drawn by the golden 
chestnuts opened a path through the crowd. The catcalls ceased and the hostile groups 
dispersed. Hildebranda was never to forget her first sight of the man who appeared on the 
footboard: his satin top hat, his brocaded vest, his knowing gestures, the sweetness in his 
eyes, the authority of his presence. 

Although she had never seen him before, she recognized him immediately. The 
previous month, Fermina Daza had spoken about him, in an offhand way and with no 
sign of interest, one afternoon when she did not want to pass by the house of the Marquis 
de Casalduero because the landau with the golden horses was stopped in front of the 
door. She told her who the owner was and attempted to explain the reasons for her 
antipathy, although she did not say a word about his courting her. Hildebranda thought no 
more about him. But when she identified him as a vision out of legend, standing in the 
carriage door with one foot on the ground and the other on the footboard, she could not 
understand her cousin’s motives. 

“Please get in,” said Dr. Juvenal Urbino. “I will take you wherever you want to go.” 

Fermina Daza began a gesture of refusal, but Hildebranda had already accepted. Dr. 
Juvenal Urbino jumped down, and with his fingertips, almost without touching her, he 
helped her into the carriage. Fermina had no alternative but to climb in after her, her face 
blazing with embarrassment. 

The house was only three blocks away. The cousins did not realize that Dr. Urbino had 
given instructions to the coachman, but he must have done so, because it took the 
carriage almost half an hour to reach its destination. The girls were on the principal seat 
and he sat opposite them, facing, the back of the carriage. Fermina turned her head 
toward the window and was lost in the void. Hildebranda, on the other hand, was 
delighted, and Dr. Urbino was even more delighted by her delight. As soon as the 
carriage began to move, she sensed the warm odor of the leather seats, the intimacy of the 
padded interior, and she said that it seemed a nice place to spend the rest of one’s life. 
Very soon they began to laugh, to exchange jokes as if they were old friends, and they 
began to match wits in a simple word game that consisted of placing a nonsense syllable 
after every other syllable. They pretended that Fermina did not understand them, although 
they knew she not only understood but was listening as well, which is why they did it. 
After much laughter, Hildebranda confessed that she could no longer endure the torture 
of her boots. 


“Nothing could be simpler,” said Dr. Urbino. “Let us see who finishes first.” 

He began to unlace his own boots, and Hildebranda accepted the challenge. It was not 
easy for her to do because the stays in the corset did not allow her to bend, but Dr. Urbino 
dallied until she took her boots out from under her skirt with a triumphant laugh, as if she 
had just fished them out of a pond. Then both of them looked at Fermina and saw her 
magnificent golden oriole’s profile sharper than ever against the blaze of the setting sun. 
She was furious for three reasons: because of the undeserved situation in which she found 
herself, because of Hildebranda’s libertine behavior, and because she was certain that the 
carriage was driving in circles in order to postpone their arrival. But Hildebranda had lost 
all restraint. 

“Now I realize,” she said, “that what bothered me was not my shoes but this wire 
cage.” 

Dr. Urbino understood that she was referring to her hoop skirt, and he seized the 
opportunity as it flew by. “Nothing could be simpler,” he said. “Take it off.” With the 
rapid movements of a prestidigitator, he removed his handkerchief from his pocket and 
covered his eyes with it. 

“I won’t look,” he said. 

The blindfold emphasized the purity of his lips surrounded by his round black beard 
and his mustache with the waxed tips, and she felt herself shaken by a sudden surge of 
panic. She looked at Fermina, and now she saw that she was not furious but terrified that 
she might be capable of taking off her skirt. Hildebranda became serious and asked her in 
sign language: “What shall we do?” Fermina answered in the same code that if they did 
not go straight home she would throw herself out of the moving carriage. 

“I am waiting,” said the Doctor. 

“You can look now,” said Hildebranda. 

When Dr. Juvenal Urbino removed the blindfold he found her changed, and he 
understood that the game had ended, and had not ended well. At a sign from him, the 
coachman turned the carriage around and drove into the Park of the Evangels, just as the 
lamplighter was making his rounds. All the churches were ringing the Angelus. 
Hildebranda hurried out of the carriage, somewhat disturbed at the idea that she had 
offended her cousin, and she said goodbye to the Doctor with a perfunctory handshake. 
Fermina did the same, but when she tried to withdraw her hand in its satin glove, Dr. 
Urbino squeezed her ring finger. 

“I am waiting for your answer,” he said. 

Then Fermina pulled harder and her empty glove was left dangling in the Doctor’s 
hand, but she did not wait to retrieve it. She went to bed without eating. Hildebranda, as 
if nothing had happened, came into the bedroom after her supper with Gala Placidia in 
the kitchen, and with her inborn wit, commented on the events of the afternoon. She did 
not attempt to hide her enthusiasm for Dr. Urbino, for his elegance and charm, and 
Fermina refused to comment, but was brimming with anger. At one point Hildebranda 
confessed that when Dr. Juvenal Urbino covered his eyes and she saw the splendor of his 
perfect teeth between his rosy lips, she had felt an irresistible desire to devour him with 
kisses. Fermina Daza turned to the wall and with no wish to offend, but smiling and with 
all her heart, put an end to the conversation: 

“What a whore you are!” she said. 

Her sleep was restless; she saw Dr. Juvenal Urbino everywhere, she saw him laughing, 


singing, emitting sulfurous sparks from between his teeth with his eyes blindfolded, 
mocking her with a word game that had no fixed rules, driving up to the paupers’ 
cemetery in a different carriage. She awoke long before dawn and lay exhausted and 
wakeful, with her eyes closed, thinking of the countless years she still had to live. Later, 
while Hildebranda was bathing, she wrote a letter as quickly as possible, folded it as 
quickly as possible, put it in an envelope as quickly as possible, and before Hildebranda 
came out of the bathroom she had Gala Placidia deliver it to Dr. Juvenal Urbino. It was 
one of her typical letters, not a syllable too many or too few, in which she told the Doctor 
yes, he could speak to her father. 

When Florentino Ariza learned that Fermina Daza was going to marry a physician with 
family and fortune, educated in Europe and with an extraordinary reputation for a man of 
his years, there was no power on earth that could raise him from his prostration. Tránsito 
Ariza did all she could and more, using all the stratagems of a sweetheart to console him 
when she realized that he had lost his speech and his appetite and was spending nights on 
end in constant weeping, and by the end of the week he was eating again. Then she spoke 
to Don Leo XII Loayza, the only one of the three brothers who was still alive, and 
without telling him the reason, she pleaded with him to give his nephew any job at all in 
the navigation company, as long as it was in a port lost in the jungle of the Magdalena, 
where there was no mail and no telegraph and no one who would tell him anything about 
this damnable city. His uncle did not give him the job out of deference to his brother’s 
widow, for she could not bear the very existence of her husband’s illegitimate son, but he 
did find him employment as a telegraph operator in Villa de Leyva, a dreamy city more 
than twenty days’ journey away and almost three thousand meters above the level of the 
Street of Windows. 

Florentino Ariza was never very conscious of that curative journey. He would 
remember it always, as he remembered everything that happened during that period, 
through the rarefied lenses of his misfortune. When he received the telegram informing 
him of his appointment, it did not even occur to him to consider it, but Lotario Thugut 
convinced him with Germanic arguments that a brilliant career awaited him in public 
administration. He told him: “The telegraph is the profession of the future.” He gave him 
a pair of gloves lined with rabbit fur, a hat worthy of the steppes, and an overcoat with a 
plush collar, tried and proven in the icy winters of Bavaria. Uncle Leo XII gave him two 
serge suits and a pair of waterproof boots that had belonged to his older brother, and he 
also gave him cabin passage on the next boat. Tránsito Ariza altered the clothing and 
made it smaller for her son, who was less corpulent than his father and much shorter than 
the German, and she bought him woolen socks and long underwear so that he would have 
everything he needed to resist the rigors of the mountain wastelands. Florentino Ariza, 
hardened by so much suffering, attended to the preparations for his journey as if he were 
a dead man attending to the preparations for his own funeral. The same iron hermeticism 
with which he had revealed to no one but his mother the secret of his repressed passion 
meant that he did not tell anyone he was going away and did not say goodbye to anyone, 
but on the eve of his departure he committed, with full awareness, a final mad act of the 
heart that might well have cost him his life. At midnight he put on his Sunday suit and 
went to stand alone under Fermina Daza’s balcony to play the love waltz he had 
composed for her, which was known only to the two of them and which for three years 
had been the emblem of their frustrated complicity. He played, murmuring the words, his 


violin bathed in tears, with an inspiration so intense that with the first measures the dogs 
on the street and then the dogs all over the city began to howl, but then, little by little, 
they were quieted by the spell of the music, and the waltz ended in supernatural silence. 
The balcony did not open, and no one appeared on the street, not even the night 
watchman, who almost always came running with his oil lamp in an effort to profit in 
some small way from serenades. The act was an exorcism of relief for Florentino Ariza, 
for when he put the violin back into its case and walked down the dead streets without 
looking back, he no longer felt that he was leaving the next morning but that he had gone 
away many years before with the irrevocable determination never to return. 

The boat, one of three identical vessels belonging to the River Company of the 
Caribbean, had been renamed in honor of the founder: Pius V Loayza. It was a floating 
two-story wooden house on a wide, level iron hull, and its maximum draft of five feet 
allowed it to negotiate the variable depths of the river. The older boats had been built in 
Cincinnati in midcentury on the legendary model of the vessels that traveled the Ohio and 
the Mississippi, with a wheel on each side powered by a wood-fed boiler. Like them, the 
boats of the River Company of the Caribbean had a lower deck almost level with the 
water, with the steam engines and the galleys and the sleeping quarters like henhouses 
where the crew hung their hammocks crisscrossed at different heights. On the upper deck 
were the bridge, the cabins of the Captain and his officers, and a recreation and dining 
room, where notable passengers were invited at least once to have dinner and play cards. 
On the middle deck were six first-class cabins on either side of a passage that served as a 
common dining room, and in the prow was a sitting room open to the river, with carved 
wood railings and iron columns, where most of the passengers hung their hammocks at 
night. Unlike the older boats, these did not have paddle wheels at the sides; instead, there 
was an enormous wheel with horizontal paddles at the stern, just underneath the 
suffocating toilets on the passenger deck. Florentino Ariza had not taken the trouble to 
explore the boat when he came aboard on a Sunday in July at seven o’clock in the 
morning, as those traveling for the first time did almost by instinct. He became aware of 
his new milieu only at dusk, as they were sailing past the hamlet of Calamar, when he 
went to the stern to urinate and saw, through the opening in the toilet, the gigantic paddle 
wheel turning under his feet with a volcanic display of foam and steam. 

He had never traveled before. He had with him a tin trunk with his clothes for the 
mountain wastelands, the illustrated novels that he bought in pamphlet form every month 
and that he himself sewed into cardboard covers, and the books of love poetry that he 
recited from memory and that were about to crumble into dust with so much reading. He 
had left behind his violin, for he identified it too closely with his misfortune, but his 
mother had obliged him to take his petate, a very popular and practical bedroll, with its 
pillow, sheet, small pewter chamber pot, and mosquito netting, all of this wrapped in 
straw matting tied with two hemp ropes for hanging a hammock in an emergency. 
Florentino Ariza had not wanted to take it, for he thought it would be useless in a cabin 
that provided bed and bedclothes, but from the very first night he had reason once again 
to be grateful for his mother’s good sense. At the last moment, a passenger dressed in 
evening clothes boarded the boat; he had arrived early that morning on a ship from 
Europe and was accompanied by the Provincial Governor himself. He wanted to continue 
his journey without delay, along with his wife and daughter and liveried servant and 
seven trunks with gold fittings, which were almost too bulky for the stair way. To 


accommodate the unexpected travelers, the Captain, a giant from Curaçao, called on the 
passengers’ indigenous sense of patriotism. In a jumble of Spanish and Curaçao patois, 
he explained to Florentino Ariza that the man in evening dress was the new 
plenipotentiary from England, on his way to the capital of the Republic; he reminded him 
of how that kingdom had provided us with decisive resources in our struggle for 
independence from Spanish rule, and that as a consequence no sacrifice was too great if it 
would allow a family of such distinction to feel more at home in our country than in their 
own. Florentino Ariza, of course, gave up his cabin. 

At first he did not regret it, for the river was high at that time of year and the boat 
navigated without any difficulty for the first two nights. After dinner, at five o’clock, the 
crew distributed folding canvas cots to the passengers, and each person opened his bed 
wherever he could find room, arranged it with the bedclothes from his petate, and set the 
mosquito netting over that. Those with hammocks hung them in the salon, and those who 
had nothing slept on the tables in the dining room, wrapped in the tablecloths that were 
not changed more than twice during the trip. Florentino Ariza was awake most of the 
night, thinking that he heard the voice of Fermina Daza in the fresh river breeze, 
ministering to his solitude with her memory, hearing her sing in the respiration of the 
boat as it moved like a great animal through the darkness, until the first rosy streaks 
appeared on the horizon and the new day suddenly broke over deserted pastureland and 
misty swamps. Then his journey seemed yet another proof of his mother’s wisdom, and 
he felt that he had the fortitude to endure forgetting. 

After three days of favorable water, however, it became more difficult to navigate 
between inopportune sandbanks and deceptive rapids. The river turned muddy and grew 
narrower and narrower in a tangled jungle of colossal trees where there was only an 
occasional straw hut next to the piles of wood for the ship’s boilers. The screeching of the 
parrots and the chattering of the invisible monkeys seemed to intensify the midday heat. 
At night it was necessary to anchor the boat in order to sleep, and then the simple fact of 
being alive became unendurable. To the heat and the mosquitoes was added the reek of 
strips of salted meat hung to dry on the railings. Most of the passengers, above all the 
Europeans, abandoned the pestilential stench of their cabins and spent the night walking 
the decks, brushing away all sorts of predatory creatures with the same towel they used to 
dry their incessant perspiration, and at dawn they were exhausted and swollen with bites. 

Moreover, another episode of the intermittent civil war between Liberals and 
Conservatives had broken out that year, and the Captain had taken very strict precautions 
to maintain internal order and protect the safety of the passengers. Trying to avoid 
misunderstandings and provocations, he prohibited the favorite pastime during river 
voyages in those days, which was to shoot the alligators sunning themselves on the broad 
sandy banks. Later on, when some of the passengers divided into two opposing camps 
during an argument, he confiscated everyone’s weapons and gave his word of honor that 
they would be returned at the end of the journey. He was inflexible even with the British 
minister who, on the morning following their departure, appeared in a hunting outfit, with 
a precision carbine and a double-barreled rifle for killing tigers. The restrictions became 
even more drastic above the port of Tenerife, where they passed a boat flying the yellow 
plague flag. The Captain could not obtain any further information regarding that alarming 
sign because the other vessel did not respond to his signals. But that same day they 
encountered another boat, with a cargo of cattle for Jamaica, and were informed that the 


vessel with the plague flag was carrying two people sick with cholera, and that the 
epidemic was wreaking havoc along the portion of the river they still had to travel. Then 
the passengers were prohibited from leaving the boat, not only in the ports but even in the 
uninhabited places where they stopped to take on wood. So that until they reached the 
final port, a trip of six days, the passengers acquired the habits of prisoners, including the 
pernicious contemplation of a packet of pornographic Dutch postcards that circulated 
from hand to hand without anyone’s knowing where it came from, although no veteran of 
the river was unaware that this was only a tiny sampling of the Captain’s legendary 
collection. But, in the end, even that distraction with no expectation only increased the 
tedium. 

Florentino Ariza endured the hardships of the journey -with the mineral patience that 
had brought sorrow to his mother and exasperation to his friends. He spoke to no one. 
The days were easy for him as he sat at the rail, watching the motionless alligators 
sunning themselves on sandy banks, their mouths open to catch butterflies, watching the 
flocks of startled herons that rose without warning from the marshes, the manatees that 
nursed their young at large maternal teats and startled the passengers with their woman’s 
cries. On a single day he saw three bloated, green, human corpses float past, with 
buzzards sitting on them. First the bodies of two men went by, one of them without a 
head, and then a very young girl, whose medusan locks undulated in the boat’s wake. He 
never knew, because no one ever knew, if they were victims of the cholera or the war, but 
the nauseating stench contaminated his memory of Fermina Daza. 

That was always the case: any event, good or bad, had some relationship to her. At 
night, when the boat was anchored and most of the passengers walked the decks in 
despair, he perused the illustrated novels he knew almost by heart under the carbide lamp 
in the dining room, which was the only one kept burning until dawn, and the dramas he 
had read so often regained their original magic when he replaced the imaginary 
protagonists with people he knew in real life, reserving for himself and Fermina Daza the 
roles of star-crossed lovers. On other nights he wrote anguished letters and then scattered 
their fragments over the water that flowed toward her without pause. And so the most 
difficult hours passed for him, at times in the person of a timid prince or a paladin of 
love, at other times in his own scalded hide of a lover in the middle of forgetting, until the 
first breezes began to blow and he went to doze in the lounge chairs by the railing. 

One night when he stopped his reading earlier than usual and was walking, distracted, 
toward the toilets, a door opened as he passed through the dining room, and a hand like 
the talon of a hawk seized him by the shirt sleeve and pulled him into a cabin. In the 
darkness he could barely see the naked woman, her ageless body soaked in hot 
perspiration, her breathing heavy, who pushed him onto the bunk face up, unbuckled his 
belt, unbuttoned his trousers, impaled herself on him as if she were riding horseback, and 
stripped him, without glory, of his virginity. Both of them fell, in an agony of desire, into 
the void of a bottomless pit that smelled of a salt marsh full of prawns. Then she lay for a 
moment on top of him, gasping for breath, and she ceased to exist in the darkness. 

“Now go and forget all about it,” she said. “This never happened.” 

The assault had been so rapid and so triumphant that it could only be understood not as 
a sudden madness caused by boredom but as the fruit of a plan elaborated over time and 
down to its smallest detail. This gratifying certainty increased Florentino Ariza’s 
eagerness, for at the height of pleasure he had experienced a revelation that he could not 


believe, that he even refused to admit, which was that his illusory love for Fermina Daza 
could be replaced by an earthly passion. And so it was that he felt compelled to discover 
the identity of the mistress of violation in whose panther’s instincts he might find the cure 
for his misfortune. But he was not successful. On the contrary, the more he delved into 
the search the further he felt from the truth. 

The assault had taken place in the last cabin, but this communicated with the one next 
to it by a door, so that the two rooms had been converted into family sleeping quarters 
with four bunks. The occupants were two young women, another who was rather mature 
but very attractive, and an infant a few months old. They had boarded in Barranco de 
Loba, the port where cargo and passengers from Mompox were picked up ever since that 
city had been excluded from the itineraries of the steamboats because of the river’s 
caprices, and Florentino Ariza had noticed them only because they carried the sleeping 
child in a large birdcage. 

They dressed as if they were traveling on a fashionable ocean liner, with bustles under 
their silk skirts and lace gorgets and broad-brimmed hats trimmed with crinoline flowers, 
and the two younger women changed their entire outfits several times a day, so that they 
seemed to carry with them their own springlike ambience while the other passengers 
were suffocating in the heat. All three were skilled in the use of parasols and feathered 
fans, but their intentions were as indecipherable as those of other women from Mompox. 
Florentino Anza could not even determine their relationship to one another, although he 
had no doubt they came from the same family. At first he thought that the older one 
might be the mother of the other two, but then he realized she was not old enough for 
that, and that she also wore partial mourning that the others did not share. He could not 
imagine that one of them would have dared to do what she did while the others were 
sleeping in the nearby bunks, and the only reasonable supposition was that she had taken 
advantage of a fortuitous, or perhaps prearranged, moment when she was alone in the 
cabin. He observed that at times two of them stayed out for a breath of cool air until very 
late, while the third remained behind, caring for the infant, but one night when it was 
very hot all three of them left the cabin, carrying the baby, who was asleep in the wicker 
cage covered with gauze. 

Despite the tangle of clues, Florentino Ariza soon rejected the possibility that the oldest 
had been the perpetrator of the assault, and with as much dispatch he also absolved the 
youngest, who was the most beautiful and the boldest of the three. He did so without 
valid reasons, but only because his avid observations of the three women had persuaded 
him to accept as truth the profound hope that his sudden lover was in fact the mother of 
the caged infant. That supposition was so seductive that he began to think about her with 
more intensity than he thought about Fermina Daza, ignoring the evidence that this recent 
mother lived only for her child. She was no more than twenty-five, she was slender and 
golden, she had Portuguese eyelids that made her seem even more aloof, and any man 
would have been satisfied with only the crumbs of the tenderness that she lavished on her 
son. From breakfast until bedtime she was busy with him in the salon, while the other two 
played Chinese checkers, and whe n at last she managed to put him to sleep she would 
hang the wicker cage from the ceiling on the cooler side of the railing. She did not ignore 
him, however, even when he was asleep, but would rock the cage, singing love songs 
under her breath while her thoughts flew high above the miseries of the journey. 
Florentino Ariza clung to the illusion that sooner or later she would betray herself, if only 


with a gesture. He even observed the changes in her breathing, watching the reliquary 
that hung on her batiste blouse as he looked at her without dissimulation over the book he 
pretended to read, and he committed the calculated impertinence of changing his seat in 
the dining room so that he would face her. But he could not find the slightest hint that she 
was in fact the repository of the other half of his secret. The only thing of hers he had, 
and that only because her younger companion called to her, was her first name: Rosalba. 

On the eighth day, the boat navigated with great difficulty through a turbulent strait 
squeezed between marble cliffs, and after lunch it anchored in Puerto Nare. This was the 
disembarkation point for those passengers who would continue their journey into 
Antioquia, one of the provinces most affected by the new civil war. The port consisted of 
half a dozen palm huts and a store made of wood, with a zinc roof, and it was protected 
by several squads of barefoot and ill-armed soldiers because there-had been rumors of a 
plan by the insurrectionists to plunder the boats. Behind the houses, reaching to the sky, 
rose a promontory of uncultivated highland with a wrought-iron cornice at the edge of the 
precipice. No one on board slept well that night, but the attack did not materialize, and in 
the morning the port was transformed into a Sunday fair, with Indians selling Tagua 
amulets and love potions amid packs of animals ready to begin the six-day ascent to the 
orchid jungles of the central mountain range. 

Florentino Ariza passed the time watching black men unload the boat onto their backs, 
he watched them carry off crates of china, and pianos for the spinsters of Envigado, and 
he did not realize until it was too late that Rosalba and her party were among the 
passengers who had stayed on shore. He saw them when they were already sitting 
sidesaddle, with their Amazons’ boots and their parasols in equatorial colors, and then he 
took the step he had not dared to take during, the preceding days: he waved goodbye to 
Rosalba, and the three women responded in kind, with a familiarity that cut him to the 
quick because his boldness came too late. He saw them round the corner of the store, 
followed by the mules carrying their trunks, their hatboxes, and the baby’s cage, and soon 
afterward he saw them ascend along the edge of the precipice like a line of ants and 
disappear from his life. Then he felt alone in the world, and the memory of Fermina 
Daza, lying in ambush in recent days, dealt him a mortal blow. 

He knew that she was to have an elaborate wedding, and then the being who loved her 
most, who would love her forever, would not even have the right to die for her. Jealousy, 
which until that time had been drowned in weeping, took possession of his soul. He 
prayed to God that the lightning of divine justice would strike Fermina Daza as she was 
about to give her vow of love and obedience to a man who wanted her for his wife only 
as a social adornment, and he went into rapture at the vision of the bride, his bride or no 
one’s, lying face up on the flagstones of the Cathedral, her orange blossoms laden with 
the dew of death, and the foaming torrent of her veil covering the funerary marbles of the 
fourteen bishops who were buried in front of the main altar. Once his revenge was 
consummated, however, he repented of his own wickedness, and then he saw Fermina 
Daza rising from the ground, her spirit intact, distant but alive, because it was not 
possible for him to imagine the world without her. He did not sleep again, and if at times 
he sat down to pick at food, it was in the hope that Fermina Daza would be at the table or, 
conversely, to deny her the homage of fasting for her sake. At times his solace was the 
certainty that during the intoxication of her wedding celebration, even during the feverish 
nights of her honeymoon, Fermina Daza would suffer one moment, one at least but one in 


any event, when the phantom of the sweetheart she had scorned, humiliated, and insulted 
would appear in her thoughts, and all her happiness would be destroyed. 

The night before they reached the port of Caracolí, which was the end of the journey, 
the Captain gave the traditional farewell party, with a woodwind orchestra composed of 
crew members, and fireworks from the bridge. The minister from Great Britain had survived 
the odyssey with exemplary stoicism, shooting with his camera the animals they 
would not allow him to kill with his rifles, and not a night went by that he was not seen in 
evening dress in the dining room. But he came to the final party wearing the tartans of the 
MacTavish clan, and he played the bagpipe for everyone’s entertainment and taught those 
who were interested how to dance his national dances, and before daybreak he almost had 
to be carried to his cabin. Florentino Ariza, prostrate with grief, had gone to the farthest 
corner of the deck where the noise of the revelry could not reach him, and he put on 
Lotario Thugut’s overcoat in an effort to overcome the shivering in his bones. He had 
awakened at five that morning, as the condemned man awakens at dawn on the day of his 
execution, and for that entire day he had done nothing but imagine, minute by minute, 
each of the events at Fermina Daza’s wedding. Later, when he returned home, he realized 
that he had made a mistake in the time and that everything had been different from what 
he had imagined, and he even had the good sense to laugh at his fantasy. 

But in any case, it was a Saturday of passion, which culminated in a new crisis of fever 
when he thought the moment had come for the newlyweds to flee in secret through a false 
door to give themselves over to the delights of their first night. Someone saw him 
shivering with fever and informed the Captain, who, fearing a case of cholera, left the 
party with the ship’s doctor, and the doctor took the precaution of sending Florentino to 
the quarantine cabin with a dose of bromides. The next day, however, when they sighted 
the cliffs of Caracolí, his fever had disappeared and his spirits were elated, because in the 
marasmus of the sedatives he had resolved once and for all that he did not give a damn 
about the brilliant future of the telegraph and that he would take this very same boat back 
to his old Street of Windows. 

It was not difficult to persuade them to give him return passage in exchange for the 
cabin he had surrendered to the representative of Queen Victoria. The Captain also 
attempted to dissuade him, arguing that the telegraph was the science of the future. So 
much so, he said, that they were already devising a system for installing it on boats. But 
he resisted all arguments, and in the end the Captain took him home, not because he owed 
him the price of the cabin but because he knew of his excellent connections to the River 
Company of the Caribbean. 

The trip downriver took less than six days, and Florentino Ariza felt that he was home 
again from the moment they entered Mercedes Lagoon at dawn and he saw the trail of 
lights on the fishing canoes undulating in the wake of the boat. It was still dark when they 
docked in Niño Perdido Cove, nine leagues from the bay and the last port for riverboats 
until the old Spanish channel was dredged and put back into service. The passengers 
would have to wait until six o’clock in the morning to board the fleet of sloops for hire 
that would carry them to their final destination. But Florentino Ariza was so eager that he 
sailed much earlier on the mail sloop, whose crew acknowledged him as one of their 
own. Before he left the boat he succumbed to the temptation of a symbolic act: he threw 
his petate into the water, and followed it with his eyes as it floated past the beacon lights 
of the invisible fishermen, left the lagoon, and disappeared in the ocean. He was sure he 


would not need it again for all the rest of his days. Never again, because never again 
would he abandon the city of Fermina Daza. 

The bay was calm at daybreak. Above the floating mist Florentino Ariza saw the dome 
of the Cathedral, gilded by the first light of dawn, he saw the dovecotes on the flat roofs, 
and orienting himself by them, he located the balcony of the palace of the Marquis de 
Casalduero, where he supposed that the lady of his misfortune was still dozing, her head 
on the shoulder of her satiated husband. That idea broke his heart, but he did nothing to 
suppress it; on the contrary, he took pleasure in his pain. The sun was beginning to grow 
hot as the mail sloop made its way through the labyrinth of sailing ships that lay at anchor 
where the countless odors from the public market and the decaying matter on the bottom 
of the bay blended into one pestilential stench. The schooner from Riohacha had just 
arrived, and gangs of stevedores in water up to their waists lifted the passengers over the 
side and carried them to shore. Florentino Ariza was the first to jump on land from the 
mail sloop, and from that time on he no longer detected the fetid reek of the bay in the 
city, but was aware only of the personal fragrance of Fermina Daza. Everything smelled 
of her. 

He did not return to the telegraph office. His only interest seemed to be the serialized 
love novels and the volumes of the Popular Library that his mother continued to buy for 
him and that he continued to read again and again, lying in his hammock, until he learned 
them by heart. He did not even ask for his violin. He reestablished relations with his 
closest friends, and sometimes they played billiards or conversed in the outdoor cafés 
under the arches around the Plaza of the Cathedral, but he did not go back to the Saturday 
night dances: he could not conceive of them without her. 

On the morning of his return from his inconclusive journey, he learned that Fermina 
Daza was spending her honeymoon in Europe, and his agitated heart took it for granted 
that she would live there, if not forever then for many years to come. This certainty filled 
him with his first hope of forgetting. He thought of Rosalba, whose memory burned 
brighter as the other’s dimmed. It was during this time that he grew the mustache with the 
waxed tips that he would keep for the rest of his life and that changed his entire being, 
and the idea of substituting one love for another carried him along surprising paths. Little 
by little the fragrance of Fermina Daza became less frequent and less intense, and at last 
it remained only in white gardenias. 

One night during the war, when he was drifting, not knowing what direction his life 
should take, the celebrated Widow Nazaret took refuge in his house because hers had 
been destroyed by cannon fire during the siege by the rebel general Ricardo Gaitán 
Obeso. It was Tránsito Ariza who took control of the situation and sent the widow to her 
son’s bedroom on the pretext that there was no space in hers, but actually in the hope that 
another love would cure him of the one that did not allow him to live. Florentino Ariza 
had not made love since he lost his virginity to Rosalba in the cabin on the boat, and in 
this emergency it seemed natural to him that the widow should sleep in the bed and he in 
the hammock. But she had already made the decision for him. She sat on the edge of the 
bed where Florentino Ariza was lying, not knowing what to do, and she began to speak to 
him of her inconsolable grief for the husband who had died three years earlier, and in the 
meantime she removed her widow’s weeds and tossed them in the air until she was not 
even wearing her wedding ring. She took off the taffeta blouse with the beaded 
embroidery and threw it across the room onto the easy chair in the corner, she tossed her 


bodice over her shoulder to the other side of the bed, with one pull she removed her long 
ruffled skirt, her satin garter belt and funereal stockings, and she threw everything on the 
floor until the room was carpeted with the last remnants of her mourning. She did it with 
so much joy, and with such well-measured pauses, that each of her gestures seemed to be 
saluted by the cannon of the attacking troops, which shook the city down to its 
foundations. Florentino Ariza tried to help her unfasten her stays, but she anticipated him 
with a deft maneuver, for in five years of matrimonial devotion she learned to depend on 
herself in all phases of love, even the preliminary stages, with no help from anyone. Then 
she removed her lace panties, sliding them down her legs with the rapid movements of a 
swimmer, and at last she was naked. 

She was twenty-eight years old and had given birth three times, but her naked body 
preserved intact the giddy excitement of an unmarried woman. Florentino Ariza was 
never to understand how a few articles of penitential clothing could have hidden the 
drives of that wild mare who, choking on her own feverish desire, undressed him as she 
had never been able to undress her husband, who would have thought her perverse, and 
tried, with the confusion and innocence of five years of conjugal fidelity, to satisfy in a 
single assault the iron abstinence of her mourning. Before that night, and from the hour of 
grace when her mother gave birth to her, she had never even been in the same bed with 
any man other than her dead husband. 

She did not permit herself the vulgarity of remorse. On the contrary. Kept awake by the 
gunfire whizzing over the roofs, she continued to evoke her husband’s excellent qualities 
until daybreak, not reproaching him for any disloyalty other than his having died without 
her, which was mitigated by her conviction that he had never belonged to her as much as 
he did now that he was in the coffin nailed shut with a dozen three-inch nails and two 
meters under the ground. 

“I am happy,” she said, “because only now do I know for certain where he is when he 
is not at home.” 

That night she stopped wearing mourning once and for all, without passing through the 
useless intermediate stage of blouses with little gray flowers, and her life was filled with 
love songs and provocative dresses decorated with macaws and spotted butterflies, and 
she began to share her body with anyone who cared to ask for it. When the troops of 
General Gaitán Obeso were defeated after a sixty-three-day siege, she rebuilt the house 
that had been damaged by cannon fire, adding a beautiful sea terrace that overlooked the 
breakwater where the surf would vent its fury during the stormy season. That was her 
love nest, as she called it without irony, where she would receive only men she liked, 
when she liked, how she liked, and without charging one red cent, because in her opinion 
it was the men who were doing her the favor. In a very few cases she would accept a gift, 
as long as it was not made of gold, and she managed everything with so much skill that 
no one could have presented conclusive evidence of improper conduct. On only one 
occasion did she hover on the edge of public scandal, when the rumor circulated that 
Archbishop Dante de Luna had not died by accident after eating a plate of poisonous 
mushrooms but had eaten them intentionally because she threatened to expose him if he 
persisted in his sacrilegious solicitations. As she used to say between peals of laughter, 
she was the only free woman in the province. 

The Widow Nazaret never missed her occasional appointments with Florentino Ariza, 
not even during her busiest times, and it was always without pretensions of loving or 


being loved, although always in the hope of finding something that resembled love, but 
without the problems of love. Sometimes he went to her house, and then they liked to sit 
on the sea terrace, drenched by salt spray, watching the dawn of the whole world on the 
horizon. With all his perseverance, he tried to teach her the tricks he had seen others 
perform through the peepholes in the transient hotel, along with the theoretical 
formulations preached by Lotario Thugut on his nights of debauchery. He persuaded her 
to let themselves be observed while they made love, to replace the conventional 
missionary position with the bicycle on the sea, or the chicken on the grill, or the drawn-
and-quartered angel, and they almost broke their necks when the cords snapped as they 
were trying to devise something new in a hammock. The lessons were to no avail. The 
truth is that she was a fearless apprentice but lacked all talent for guided fornication. She 
never understood the charm of serenity in bed, never had a moment of invention, and her 
orgasms were inopportune and epidermic: an uninspired lay. For a long time Florentino 
Ariza lived with the deception that he was the only one, and she humored him in that 
belief until she had the bad luck to talk in her sleep. Little by little, listening to her sleep, 
he pieced together the navigation chart of her dreams and sailed among the countless 
islands of her secret life. In this way he learned that she did not want to marry him, but 
did feel joined to his life because of her immense gratitude to him for having corrupted 
her. She often said to him: 

“I adore you because you made me a whore.” 

Said in another way, she was right. Florentino Ariza had stripped her of the virginity of 
a conventional marriage, more pernicious than congenital virginity or the abstinence of 
widowhood. He had taught her that nothing one does in bed is immoral if it helps to 
perpetuate love. And something else that from that time on would be her reason for 
living: he convinced her that one comes into the world with a predetermined allotment of 
lays, and whoever does not use them for whatever reason, one’s own or someone else’s, 
willingly or unwillingly, loses them forever. It was to her credit that she took him at his 
word. Still, because he thought he knew her better than anyone else, Florentino Ariza 
could not understand why a woman of such puerile resources should be so popular--a 
woman, moreover, who never stopped talking in bed about the grief she felt for her dead 
husband. The only explanation he could think of, one that could not be denied, was that 
the Widow Nazaret had enough tenderness to make up for what she lacked in the marital 
arts. They began to see each other with less frequency as she widened her horizons and 
he exploited his, trying to find solace in other hearts for his pain, and at last, with no 
sorrow, they forgot each other. 

That was Florentino Ariza’s first bedroom love. But instead of their forming a 
permanent union, of the kind his mother dreamed about, both used it to embark on a 
profligate way of life. Florentino Ariza developed methods that seemed incredible in 
someone like him, taciturn and thin and dressed like an old man from another time. He 
had two advantages working in his favor, however. One was an unerring eye that 
promptly spotted the woman, even in a crowd, who was waiting for him, though even 
then he courted her with caution, for he felt that nothing was more embarrassing or more 
demeaning than a refusal. The other was that women promptly identified him as a solitary 
man in need of love, a street beggar as humble as a whipped dog, who made them yield 
without conditions, without asking him for anything, without hoping for anything from 
him except the tranquillity of knowing they had done him a favor. These were his only 


weapons, and with them he joined in historic battles of absolute secrecy, which he 
recorded with the rigor of a notary in a coded book, recognizable among many others by 
the title that said everything: Women. His first notation was the Widow Nazaret. Fifty 
years later, when Fermina Daza was freed from her sacramental sentence, he had some 
twenty-five notebooks, with six hundred twenty-two entries of long-term liaisons, apart 
from the countless fleeting adventures that did not even deserve a charitable note. 

After six months of furious lovemaking with the Widow Nazaret, Florentino Ariza 
himself was convinced that he had survived the torment of Fermina Daza. He not only 
believed it, he also discussed it several times with Tránsito Ariza during the two years of 
Fermina Daza’s wedding trip, and he continued to believe it with a feeling of boundless 
freedom until one fateful Sunday when, with no warning and no presentiments, he saw 
her leaving High Mass on her husband’s arm, besieged by the curiosity and flattery of her 
new world. The same ladies from fine families who at first had scorned and ridiculed her 
for being an upstart without a name went out of their way to make her feel like one of 
them, and she intoxicated them with her charm. She had assumed the condition of woman 
of the world to such perfection that Florentino Ariza needed a moment of reflection to 
recognize her. She was another person: the composure of an older woman, the high boots, 
the hat with the veil and colored plume from some Oriental bird--everything about her 
was distinctive and confident, as if it had been hers from birth. He found her more 
beautiful and youthful than ever, but more lost to him than she had ever been, although he 
did not understand why until he saw the curve of her belly under the silk tunic: she was in 
her sixth month of pregnancy. But what impressed him most was that she and her 
husband made an admirable couple, and both of them negotiated the world with so much 
fluidity that they seemed to float above the pitfalls of reality. Florentino Ariza did not feel 
either jealousy or rage--only great contempt for himself. He felt poor, ugly, inferior, and 
unworthy not only of her but of any other woman on the face of the earth. 

So she had returned. She came back without any reason to repent of the sudden change 
she had made in her life. On the contrary, she had fewer and fewer such reasons, above 
all after surviving the difficulties of the early years, which was especially admirable in 
her case, for she had come to her wedding night still trailing clouds of innocence. She had 
begun to lose them during her journey through Cousin Hildebranda’s province. In 
Valledupar she realized at last why the roosters chase the hens, she witnessed the brutal 
ceremony of the burros, she watched the birth of calves, and she listened to her cousins 
talking with great naturalness about which couples in the family still made love and 
which ones had stopped, and when, and why, even though they continued to live together. 
That was when she was initiated into solitary love, with the strange sensation of 
discovering something that her instincts had always known, first in bed, holding her 
breath so she would not give herself away in the bedroom she shared with half a dozen 
cousins, and then, with eagerness and unconcern, sprawling on the bathroom floor, her 
hair loose, smoking her first mule drivers’ cigarette. She always did it with certain pangs 
of conscience, which she could overcome only after she was married, and always in 
absolute secrecy, although her cousins boasted to each other not only about the number of 
orgasms they had in one day but even about their form and size. But despite those 
bewitching first rites, she was still burdened by the belief that the loss of virginity was a 
bloody sacrifice. 

So that her wedding, one of the most spectacular of the final years of the last century, 


was for her the prelude to horror. The anguish of the honeymoon affected her much more 
than the social uproar caused by her marriage to the most incomparably elegant young 
man of the day. When the banns were announced at High Mass in the Cathedral, Fermina 
Daza received anonymous letters again, some of them containing death threats, but she 
took scant notice of them because all the fear of which she was capable was centered on 
her imminent violation. Although that was not her intention, it was the correct way to 
respond to anonymous letters from a class accustomed by the affronts of history to bow 
before faits accomplis. So that little by little they swallowed their opposition as it became 
clear that the marriage was irrevocable. She noticed the gradual changes in the attention 
paid her by livid women, degraded by arthritis and resentment, who one day were 
convinced of the uselessness of their intrigues and appeared unannounced in the little 
Park of the Evangels as if it were their own home, bearing recipes and engagement gifts. 
Tránsito Ariza knew that world, although this was the only time it caused her suffering in 
her own person, and she knew that her clients always reappeared on the eve of great 
parties to ask her please to dig down into her jars and lend them their pawned jewels for 
only twenty-four hours in exchange for the payment of additional interest. It had been a 
long while since this had occurred to the extent it did now, the jars emptied so that the 
ladies with long last names could emerge from their shadowy sanctuaries and, radiant in 
their own borrowed jewels, appear at a wedding more splendid than any that would be 
seen for the rest of the century and whose ultimate glory was the sponsorship of Dr. 
Rafael Núñez, three times President of the Republic, philosopher, poet, and author of the 
words to the national anthem, as anyone could learn, from that time on, in some of the 
more recent dictionaries. Fermina Daza came to the main altar of the Cathedral on the 
arm of her father, whose formal dress lent him, for the day, an ambiguous air of 
respectability. She was married forever after at the main altar of the Cathedral, with a 
Mass at which three bishops officiated, at eleven o’clock in the morning on the day of the 
Holy Trinity, and without a single charitable thought for Florentino Ariza, who at that 
hour was delirious with fever, dying because of her, lying without shelter on a boat that 
was not to carry him to forgetting. During the ceremony, and later at the reception, she 
wore a smile that seemed painted on with white lead, a soulless grimace that some 
interpreted as a mocking smile of victory, but in reality was her poor attempt at 
disguising the terror of a virgin bride. 

It was fortunate that unforeseen circumstances, combined with her husband’s 
understanding, resolved the first three nights without pain. It was providential. The ship 
of the Compagnie Générale Transatlantique, its itinerary upset by bad weather in the 
Caribbean, announced only three days in advance that its departure had been moved 
ahead by twenty-four hours, so that it would not sail for La Rochelle on the day following 
the wedding, as had been planned for the past six months, but on that same night. No one 
believed that the change was not another of the many elegant surprises the wedding had 
to offer, for the reception ended after midnight on board the brightly lit ocean liner, with 
a Viennese orchestra that was premiering the most recent waltzes by Johann Strauss on 
this voyage. So that various members of the wedding party, soggy with champagne, had 
to be dragged ashore by their long-suffering wives when they began to ask the stewards if 
there were any free cabins so they could continue the celebration all the way to Paris. The 
last to leave saw Lorenzo Daza outside the port taverns, sitting on the ground in the 
middle of the street, his tuxedo in ruins. He was crying with tremendous loud wails, the 


way Arabs cry for their dead, sitting in a trickle of fouled water that might well have been 
a pool of tears. 

Not on the first night on rough seas, or on the following nights of smooth sailing, or 
ever in her very long married life did the barbarous acts occur that Fermina Daza had 
feared. Despite the size of the ship and the luxuries of their stateroom, the first night was 
a horrible repetition of the schooner trip from Riohacha, and her husband, a diligent 
physician, did not sleep at all so he could comfort her, which was all that an overly 
distinguished physician knew how to do for seasickness. But the storm abated on the 
third day, after the port of Guayra, and by that time they had spent so much time together 
and had talked so much that they felt like old friends. On the fourth night, when both 
resumed their ordinary habits, Dr. Juvenal Urbino was surprised that his young wife did 
not pray before going to sleep. She was frank with him: the duplicity of the nuns had 
provoked in her a certain resistance to rituals, but her faith was intact, and she had 
learned to maintain it in silence. She said: “I prefer direct communication with God.” He 
understood her reasoning, and from then on they each practiced the same religion in their 
own way. They had had a brief engage ment, but a rather informal one for that time: Dr. 
Urbino had visited her in her house, without a chaperone, every day at sunset. She would 
not have permitted him to touch even her fingertips before the episcopal blessing, but he 
had not attempted to. It was on the first calm night, when they were in bed but still 
dressed, that he began his first caresses with so much care that his suggestion that she put 
on her nightdress seemed natural to her. She went into the bathroom to change, but first 
she turned out the lights in the stateroom, and when she came out in her chemise she 
covered the cracks around the door with articles of clothing so she could return to bed in 
absolute darkness. As she did so, she said with good humor: 

“What do you expect, Doctor? This is the first time I have slept with a stranger.” 

Dr. Urbino felt her slide in next to him like a startled little animal, trying to keep as far 
away as possible in a bunk where it was difficult for two people to be together without 
touching. He took her hand, cold and twitching with terror, he entwined his fingers with 
hers, and almost in a whisper he began to recount his recollections of other ocean 
voyages. She was tense again because when she came back to bed she realized that he 
had taken off all his clothes while she was in the bathroom, which revived her terror of 
what was to come. But what was to come took several hours, for Dr. Urbino continued 
talking very slowly as he won her body’s confidence millimeter by millimeter. He spoke 
to her of Paris, of love in Paris, of the lovers in Paris who kissed on the street, on the 
omnibus, on the flowering terraces of the cafés opened to the burning winds and languid 
accordions of summer, who made love standing up on the quays of the Seine without 
anyone disturbing them. As he spoke in the darkness he caressed the curve of her neck 
with his fingertips, he caressed the fine silky hair on her arms, her evasive belly, and 
when he felt that her tension had given way he made his first attempt to raise her 
nightgown, but she stopped him with an impulse typical of her character. She said: “I 
know how to do it myself.” She took it off, in fact, and then she was so still that Dr. 
Urbino might have thought she was no longer there if it had not been for the glint of her 
body in the darkness. 

After a while he took her hand again, and this time it was warm and relaxed but still 
moist with a tender dew. They were silent and unmoving for a while longer, he looking 
for the opportunity to take the next step and she waiting for it without knowing where it 


would come from, while the darkness expanded as their breathing grew more and more 
intense. Without warning he let go of her hand and made his leap into the void: he wet 
the tip of his forefinger with his tongue and grazed her nipple when it was caught off 
guard, and she felt a mortal explosion as if he had touched a raw nerve. She was glad of 
the darkness so he could not see the searing blush that shook her all the way to the base 
of her skull. “Don’t worry,” he said with great calm. “Don’t forget that I’ve met them 
already.” He felt her smile, and her voice was sweet and new in the darkness. 

“I remember it very well,” she said, “and I’m still angry.” Then he knew that they had 
rounded the cape of good hope, and he took her large, soft hand again and covered it with 
forlorn little kisses, first the hard metacarpus, the long, discerning fingers, the diaphanous 
nails, and then the hieroglyphics of her destiny on her perspiring palm. She never knew 
how her hand came to his chest and felt something it could not decipher. He said: “It is a 
scapular.” She caressed the hairs on his chest one by one and then seized all the hair in 
her fist to pull it out by the roots. “Harder,” he said. She tried, until she knew she was not 
hurting him, and then it was her hand that sought his, lost in the darkness. But he did not 
allow their fingers to intertwine; instead he grasped her by the wrist and moved her hand 
along his body with an invisible but well-directed strength until she felt the ardent breath 
of a naked animal without bodily form, but eager and erect. Contrary to what he had 
imagined, even contrary to what she herself had imagined, she did not withdraw her hand 
or let it lie inert where he placed it, but instead she commended herself body and soul to 
the Blessed Virgin, clenched her teeth for fear she would laugh out loud at her own 
madness, and began to identify her rearing adversary by touch, discovering its size, the 
strength of its shaft, the extension of its wings, amazed by its determination but pitying 
its solitude, making it her own with a detailed curiosity that someone less experienced 
than her husband might have confused with caresses. He summoned all his reserves of 
strength to overcome the vertigo of her implacable scrutiny, until she released it with 
childish unconcern as if she were tossing it into the trash. 

“I have never been able to understand how that thing works,” she said. 

Then, with authoritative methodology, he explained it to her in all seriousness while he 
moved her hand to the places he mentioned and she allowed it to be moved with the 
obedience of an exemplary pupil. At a propitious moment he suggested that all of this 
was easier in the light. He was going to turn it on, but she held his arm, saying: “I see 
better with my hands.” In reality she wanted to turn on the light as well, but she wanted to 
be the one to do it, without anyone’s ordering her to, and she had her way. Then he saw 
her in the sudden brightness, huddled in the fetal position beneath the sheet. But he 
watched as she grasped the animal under study without hesitation, turned it this way and 
that, observed it with an interest that was beginning to seem more than scientific, and said 
when she was finished: “How ugly it is, even uglier than a woman’s thing.” He agreed, 
and pointed out other disadvantages more serious than ugliness. He said: “It is like a 
firstborn son: you spend your life working for him, sacrificing everything for him, and at 
the moment of truth he does just as he pleases.” She continued to examine it, asking what 
this was for and what that was for, and when she felt satisfied with her information she 
hefted it in both hands to confirm that it did not weigh enough to bother with, and let it 
drop with a gesture of disdain. 

“Besides, I think it has too many things on it,” she said. 

He was astounded. The original thesis of his dissertation had been just that: the 


advantage of simplifying the human organism. It seemed antiquated to him, with many 
useless or duplicated functions that had been essential in other stages of the human race 
but were not in ours. Yes: it could be more simple and by the same token less vulnerable. 
He concluded: “It is something that only God can do, of course, but in any event it would 
be good to have it established in theoretical terms.” She laughed with amusement and so 
much naturalness that he took advantage of the opportunity to embrace her and kiss her 
for the first time on the mouth. She responded, and he continued giving her very soft 
kisses on her cheeks, her nose, her eyelids, while he slipped his hand under the sheet and 
caressed her flat, straight pubic hair: the pubic hair of a Japanese. She did not move his 
hand away, but she kept hers on the alert in the event that he took one step further. 

“Let’s not go on with the medical lesson,” she said. 

“No,” he said. “This is going to be a lesson in love.” 

Then he pulled down the sheet and she not only did not object but kicked it away from 
the bunk with a rapid movement of her feet because she could no longer bear the heat. 
Her body was undulant and elastic, much more serious than it appeared when dressed, 
with its own scent of a forest animal, which distinguished her from all the other women 
in the world. Defenseless in the light, she felt a rush of blood surge up to her face, and the 
only way she could think of to hide it was to throw her arms around her husband’s neck 
and give him a hard, thorough kiss that lasted until they were both gasping for breath. 

He was aware that he did not love her. He had married her because he liked her 
haughtiness, her seriousness, her strength, and also because of some vanity on his part, 
but as she kissed him for the first time he was sure there would be no obstacle to their 
inventing true love. They did not speak of it that first night, when they spoke of 
everything until dawn, nor would they ever speak of it. But in the long run, neither of 
them had made a mistake. 

At dawn, when they fell asleep, she was still a virgin, but she would not be one much 
longer. The following night, in fact, after he taught her how to dance Viennese waltzes 
under the starry Caribbean sky, he went to the bathroom after she did, and when he 
returned to the stateroom he found her waiting for him naked in the bed. Then it was she 
who took the initiative, and gave herself without fear, without regret, with the joy of an 
adventure on the high seas, and with no traces of bloody ceremony except for the rose of 
honor on the sheet. They both made love well, almost as if by miracle, and they 
continued to make love well, night and day and better each time for the rest of the 
voyage, and when they reached La Rochelle they got along as if they were old lovers. 

They stayed in Europe, with Paris as their base, and made short trips to neighboring 
countries. During that time they made love every day, more than once on winter Sundays 
when they frolicked in bed until it was time for lunch. He was a man of strong impulses, 
and well disciplined besides, and she was not one to let anyone take advantage of her, so 
they had to be content with sharing power in bed. After three months of feverish 
lovemaking he concluded that one of them was sterile, and they both submitted to 
rigorous examinations at the Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, where he had been an intern. It 
was an arduous but fruitless effort. However, when they least expected it, and with no 
scientific intervention, the miracle occurred. When they returned home, Fermina was in 
the sixth month of her pregnancy and thought herself the happiest woman on earth. The 
child they had both longed for was born without incident under the sign of Aquarius and 
baptized in honor of the grandfather who had died of cholera. 


It was impossible to know if it was Europe or love that changed them, for both 
occurred at the same time. They were, in essence, not only between themselves but with 
everyone else, just as Florentino Ariza perceived them when he saw them leaving Mass 
two weeks after their return on that Sunday of his misfortune. They came back with a 
new conception of life, bringing with them the latest trends in the world and ready to 
lead, he with the most recent developments in literature, music, and above all in his 
science. He had a subscription to Le Figaro, so he would not lose touch with reality, and 
another to the Revue des Deux Mondes, so that he would not lose touch with poetry. He 
had also arranged with his bookseller in Paris to receive works by the most widely read 
authors, among them Anatole France and Pierre Loti, and by those he liked best, 
including Rémy de Gourmont and Paul Bourget, but under no circumstances anything by 
Emile Zola, whom he found intolerable despite his valiant intervention in the Dreyfus 
affair. The same bookseller agreed to mail him the most attractive scores from the 
Ricordi catalogue, chamber music above all, so that he could maintain the well-deserved 
title earned by his father as the greatest friend of concerts in the city. 

Fermina Daza, always resistant to the demands of fashion, brought back six trunks of 
clothing from different periods, for the great labels did not convince her. She had been in 
the Tuileries in the middle of winter for the launching of the collection by Worth, the 
indisputable tyrant of haute couture, and the only thing she got was a case of bronchitis 
that kept her in bed for five days. Laferrière seemed less pretentious and voracious to her, 
but her wise decision was to buy her fill of what she liked best in the secondhand shops, 
although her husband swore in dismay that it was corpses’ clothing. In the same way she 
brought back quantities of Italian shoes without brand names, which she preferred to the 
renowned and famous shoes by Ferry, and she brought back a parasol from Dupuy, as red 
as the fires of hell, which gave our alarmed social chroniclers much to write about. She 
bought only one hat from Madame Reboux, but on the other hand she filled a trunk with 
sprigs of artificial cherries, stalks of all the felt flowers she could find, branches of ostrich 
plumes, crests of peacocks, tailfeathers of Asiatic roosters, entire pheasants, 
hummingbirds, and a countless variety of exotic birds preserved in midflight, midcall, 
midagony: everything that had been used in the past twenty years to change the 
appearance of hats. She brought back a collection of fans from countries all over the 
world, each one appropriate to a different occasion. She brought back a disturbing 
fragrance chosen from many at the perfume shop in the Bazar de la Charité, before the 
spring winds leveled everything with ashes, but she used it only once because she did not 
recognize herself in the new scent. She also brought back a cosmetic case that was the 
latest thing in seductiveness, and she took it to parties at a time when the simple act of 
checking one’s makeup in public was considered indecent. 

They also brought back three indelible memories: the unprecedented opening of The 
Tales of Hoffmann in Paris, the terrifying blaze that destroyed almost all the gondolas off 
St. Mark’s Square in Venice, which they witnessed with grieving hearts from the window 
of their hotel, and their fleeting glimpse of Oscar Wilde during the first snowfall in 
January. But amid these and so many other memories, Dr. Juvenal Urbino had one that he 
always regretted not sharing with his wife, for it came from his days as a bachelor student 
in Paris. It was the memory of Victor Hugo, who enjoyed an impassioned fame here that 
had nothing to do with his books, because someone said that he had said, although no one 
actually heard him say it, that our Constitution was meant for a nation not of men but of 


angels. From that time on, special homage was paid to him, and most of our many compatriots 
who traveled to France went out of their way to see him. A half-dozen students, 
among them Juvenal Urbino, stood guard for a time outside his residence on Avenue 
Eylau, and at the cafés where it was said he came without fail and never came, and at last 
they sent a written request for a private audience in the name of the angels of the 
Constitution of Rionegro. They never received a reply. One day, when Juvenal Urbino 
happened to be passing the Luxembourg Gardens, he saw him come out of the Senate 
with a young woman on his arm. He seemed very old, he walked with difficulty, his 
beard and hair were less brilliant than in his pictures, and he wore an overcoat that 
seemed to belong to a larger man. He did not want to ruin the memory with an 
impertinent greeting: he was satisfied with the almost unreal vision that he would keep 
for the rest of his life. When he returned to Paris as a married man, in a position to see 
him under more formal circumstances, Victor Hugo had already died. 

As a consolation, Juvenal Urbino and Fermina Daza brought back the shared memory 
of a snowy afternoon when they were intrigued by a crowd that defied the storm outside a 
small bookshop on the Boulevard des Capucines because Oscar Wilde was inside. When 
he came out at last, elegant indeed but perhaps too conscious of being so, the group 
surrounded him, asking that he sign their books. Dr. Urbino had stopped just to watch 
him, but his impulsive wife wanted to cross the boulevard so that he could sign the only 
thing she thought appropriate, given the fact that she did not have a book: her beautiful 
gazelle-skin glove, long, smooth, soft, the same color as her newlywed’s skin. She was 
sure that a man as refined as he would appreciate the gesture. But her husband objected 
with firmness, and when she tried to go despite his arguments, he did not feel he could 
survive the embarrassment. 

“If you cross that street,” he said to her, “when you get back here you will find me 
dead.” 

It was something natural in her. Before she had been married a year, she moved 
through the world with the same assurance that had been hers as a little girl in the wilds 
of San Juan de la Ciénaga, as if she had been born with it, and she had a facility for 
dealing with strangers that left her husband dumbfounded, and a mysterious talent for 
making herself understood in Spanish with anyone, anywhere. “You have to know 
languages when you go to sell something,” she said with mocking laughter. “But when 
you go to buy, everyone does what he must to understand you.” It was difficult to 
imagine anyone who could have assimilated the daily life of Paris with so much speed 
and so much joy, and who learned to love her memory of it despite the eternal rain. 
Nevertheless, when she returned home overwhelmed by so many experiences, tired of 
traveling, drowsy with her pregnancy, the first thing she was asked in the port was what 
she thought of the marvels of Europe, and she summed up many months of bliss with 
four words of Caribbean slang: 

“It’s not so much.” 


CHAPTER FOUR 

THE DAY THAT Florentino Ariza saw Fermina Daza in the atrium of the Cathedral, in 
the sixth month of her pregnancy and in full command of her new condition as a woman 
of the world, he made a fierce decision to win fame and fortune in order to deserve her. 
He did not even stop to think about the obstacle of her being married, because at the same 
time he decided, as if it depended on himself alone, that Dr. Juvenal Urbino had to die. 
He did not know when or how, but he considered it an ineluctable event that he was 
resolved to wait for without impatience or violence, even till the end of time. 

He began at the beginning. He presented himself unannounced in the office of Uncle 
Leo XII, President of the Board of Directors and General Manager of the River Company 
of the Caribbean, and expressed his willingness to yield to his plans. His uncle was angry 
with him because of the manner in which he had thrown away the good position of 
telegraph operator in Villa de Leyva, but he allowed himself to be swayed by his 
conviction that human beings are not born once and for all on the day their mothers give 
birth to them, but that life obliges them over and over again to give birth to themselves. 
Besides, his brother’s widow had died the year before, still smarting from rancor but 
without any heirs. And so he gave the job to his errant nephew. 

It was a decision typical of Don Leo XII Loayza. Inside the shell of a soulless merchant 
was hidden a genial lunatic, as willing to bring forth a spring of lemonade in the Guajira 
Desert as to flood a solemn funeral with weeping at his heartbreaking rendition of “In 
Questa Tomba Oscura.” His head was covered with curls, he had the lips of a faun, and 
all he needed was a lyre and a laurel wreath to be the image of the incendiary Nero of 
Christian mythology. When he was not occupied with the administration of his decrepit 
vessels, still afloat out of sheer distraction on the part of fate, or with the problems of 
river navigation, which grew more and more critical every day, he devoted his free time 
to the enrichment of his lyric repertoire. He liked nothing better than to sing at funerals. 
He had the voice of a galley slave, untrained but capable of impressive registers. 
Someone had told him that Enrico Caruso could shatter a vase with the power of his 
voice, and he had spent years trying to imitate him, even with the windowpanes. His 
friends brought him the most delicate vases they had come across in their travels through 
the world, and they organized special parties so that he might at last achieve the culmination 
of his dream. He never succeeded. Still, in the depth of his thundering there was a 
glimmer of tenderness that broke the hearts of his listeners as if they were the crystal 
vases of the great Caruso, and it was this that made him so revered at funerals. Except at 
one, when he thought it a good idea to sing “When I Wake Up in Glory,” a beautiful and 
moving funeral song from Louisiana, and he was told to be quiet by the priest, who could 
not understand that Protestant intrusion in his church. 

And so, between operatic encores and Neapolitan serenades, his creative talent and his 
invincible entrepreneurial spirit made him the hero of river navigation during the time of 
its greatest splendor. He had come from nothing, like his dead brothers, and all of them 
went as far as they wished despite the stigma of being illegitimate children and, even 


worse, illegitimate children who had never been recognized. They were the cream of 
what in those days was called the “shop-counter aristocracy,” whose sanctuary was the 
Commercial Club. And yet, even when he had the resources to live like the Roman 
emperor he resembled, Uncle Leo XII lived in the old city because it was convenient to 
his business, in such an austere manner and in such a plain house that he could never 
shake off an unmerited reputation for miserliness. His only luxury was even simpler: a 
house by the sea, two leagues from his offices, furnished only with six handmade stools, 
a stand for earthenware jars, and a hammock on the terrace where he could lie down to 
think on Sundays. No one described him better than he did when someone accused him of 
being rich. 

“No, not rich,” he said. “I am a poor man with money, which is not the same thing.” 

His strange nature, which someone once praised in a speech as lucid dementia, allowed 
him to see in an instant what no one else ever saw in Florentino Ariza. From the day he 
came to his office to ask for work, with his doleful appearance and his twenty-six useless 
years behind him, he had tested him with the severity of a barracks training that could 
have broken the hardest man. But he did not intimidate him. What Uncle Leo XII never 
suspected was that his nephew’s courage did not come from the need to survive or from a 
brute indifference inherited from his father, but from a driving need for love, which no 
obstacle in this world or the next would ever break. 

The worst years were the early ones, when he was appointed clerk to the Board of 
Directors, which seemed a position made to order for him. Lotario Thugut, Uncle Leo 
XII’s old music teacher, was the one who advised him to give his nephew a writing job 
because he was a voracious wholesale consumer of literature, although he preferred the 
worst to the best. Uncle Leo XII disregarded what he said concerning his nephew’s bad 
taste in reading, for Lotario Thugut would also say of him that he had been his worst 
voice student, and still he could make even tombstones cry. In any case, the German was 
correct in regard to what he had thought about least, which was that Florentino Ariza 
wrote everything with so much passion that even official documents seemed to be about 
love. His bills of lading were rhymed no matter how he tried to avoid it, and routine business 
letters had a lyrical spirit that diminished their authority. His uncle himself came to 
his office one day with a packet of correspondence that he had not dared put his name to, 
and he gave him his last chance to save his soul. 

“If you cannot write a business letter you will pick up the trash on the dock,” he said. 

Florentino Ariza accepted the challenge. He made a supreme effort to learn the 
mundane simplicity of mercantile prose, imitating models from notarial files with the 
same diligence he had once used for popular poets. This was the period when he spent his 
free time in the Arcade of the Scribes, helping unlettered lovers to write their scented 
love notes, in order to unburden his heart of all the words of love that he could not use in 
customs reports. But at the end of six months, no matter how hard he twis ted, he could 
not wring the neck of his die hard swan. So that when Uncle Leo XII reproached him a 
second time, he admitted defeat, but with a certain haughtiness. 

“Love is the only thing that interests me,” he said. 

“The trouble,” his uncle said to him, “is that without river navigation there is no love.” 
He kept his threat to have him pick up trash on the dock, but he gave him his word that 
he would promote him, step by step, up the ladder of faithful service until he found his 
place. And he did. No work could defeat him, no matter how hard or humiliating it was, 


no salary, no matter how miserable, could demoralize him, and he never lost his essential 
fearlessness when faced with the insolence of his superiors. But he was not an innocent, 
either: everyone who crossed his path suffered the consequences of the overwhelming 
determination, capable of anything, that lay behind his helpless appearance. Just as Uncle 
Leo XII had foreseen, and according to his desire that his nephew not be ignorant of any 
secret in the business, Florentino Ariza moved through every post during thirty years of 
dedication and tenacity in the face of every trial. He fulfilled all his duties with admirable 
skill, studying every thread in that mysterious warp that had so much to do with the 
offices of poetry, but he never won the honor he most desired, which was to write one, 
just one, acceptable business letter. Without intending to, without even knowing it, he 
demonstrated with his life that his father had been right when he repeated until his dying 
day that there was no one with more common sense, no stonecutter more obstinate, no 
manager more lucid or dangerous, than a poet. That, at least, is what he was told by 
Uncle Leo XII, who talked to him about his father during moments of sentimental leisure 
and created an image that resembled a dreamer more than it did a businessman. 

He told him that Pius V Loayza used the offices for matters more pleasant than work, 
and that he always arranged to leave the house on Sundays, with the excuse that he had to 
meet or dispatch a boat. What is more, he had an old boiler installed in the warehouse 
patio, with a steam whistle that someone would sound with navigation signals in the 
event his wife became suspicious. According to his calculations, Uncle Leo XII was 
certain that Florentino Ariza had been conceived on a desk in some unlocked office on a 
hot Sunday afternoon, while from her house his father’s wife heard the farewells of a boat 
that never sailed. By the time she learned the truth it was too late to accuse him of infamy 
because her husband was already dead. She survived him by many years, destroyed by 
the bitterness of not having a child and asking God in her prayers for the eternal 
damnation of his bastard son. 

The image of his father disturbed Florentino Ariza. His mother had spoken of him as a 
great man with no commercial vocation, who had at last gone into the river business 
because his older brother had been a very close collaborator of the German commodore 
Johann B. Elbers, the father of river navigation. They were the illegitimate sons of the 
same mother, a cook by trade, who had them by different men, and all bore her surname 
and the name of a pope chosen at random from the calendar of saints’ days, except for 
Uncle Leo XII, named after the Pope in office when he was born. The man called 
Florentino was their maternal grandfather, so that the name had come down to the son of 
Tránsito Ariza after skipping over an entire generation of pontiffs. 

Florentino always kept the notebook in which his father wrote love poems, some of 
them inspired by Tránsito Ariza, its pages decorated with drawings of broken hearts. Two 
things surprised him. One was the character of his father’s handwriting, identical to his 
own although he had chosen his because it was the one he liked best of the many he saw 
in a manual. The other was finding a sentence that he thought he had composed but that 
his father had written in the notebook long before he was born: The only regret I will 
have in dying is if it is not for love. 

He had also seen the only two pictures of his father. One had been taken in Santa Fe, 
when he was very young, the same age as Florentino Ariza when he saw the photograph 
for the first time, and in it he was wearing an overcoat that made him look as if he were 
stuffed inside a bear, and he was leaning against a pedestal that supported the decapitated 


gaiters of a statue. The little boy beside him was Uncle Leo XII, wearing a ship captain’s 
hat. In the other photograph, his father was with a group of soldiers in God knows which 
of so many wars, and he held the longest rifle, and his mustache had a gunpowder smell 
that wafted out of the picture. He was a Liberal and a Mason, just like his brothers, and 
yet he wanted his son to go to the seminary. Florentino Ariza did not see the resemblance 
that people observed, but according to his Uncle Leo XII, Pius V was also reprimanded 
for the lyricism of his documents. In any case, he did not resemble him in the pictures, or 
in his memories of him, or in the image transfigured by love that his mother painted, or in 
the one unpainted by his Uncle Leo XII with his cruel wit. Nevertheless, Florentino Ariza 
discovered the resemblance many years later, as he was combing his hair in front of the 
mirror, and only then did he understand that a man knows when he is growing old 
because he begins to look like his father. 

He had no memory of him on the Street of Windows. He thought he knew that at one 
time his father slept there, very early in his love affair with Tránsito Ariza, but that he did 
not visit her again after the birth of Florentino. For many years the baptismal certificate 
was our only valid means of identification, and Florentino Ariza’s, recorded in the parish 
church of St. Tiburtius, said only that he was the natural son of an unwed natural 
daughter called Tránsito Ariza. The name of his father did not appear on it, although Pius 
V took care of his son’s needs in secret until the day he died. This social condition closed 
the doors of the seminary to Florentino Ariza, but he also escaped military service during 
the bloodiest period of our wars because he was the only son of an unmarried woman. 

Every Friday after school he sat across from the offices of the River Company of the 
Caribbean, looking at pictures of animals in a book that was falling apart because he had 
looked at it so often. His father would walk into the building without looking at him, 
wearing the frock coats that Tránsito Ariza later had to alter for him, and with a face 
identical to that of St. John the Evangelist on the altars. When he came out, many hours 
later, he would make certain that no one saw him, not even his coachman, and he would 
give him money for the week’s expenses. They did not speak, not only because his father 
made no effort to, but because he was terrified of him. One day, after he waited much 
longer than usual, his father gave him the coins and said: 

“Take them and do not come back again.” 

It was the last time he saw him. But in time he was to learn that Uncle Leo XII, who 
was some ten years younger, continued to bring money to Tránsito Ariza, and was the 
one who took care of her after Pius V died of an untreated colic without leaving anything 
in writing and without the time to make any provisions for his only child: a child of the 
streets. 

The drama of Florentino Ariza while he was a clerk for the River Company of the 
Caribbean was that he could not avoid lyricism because he was always thinking about 
Fermina Daza, and he had never learned to write without thinking about her. Later, when 
he was moved to other posts, he had so much love left over inside that he did not know 
what to do with it, and he offered it to unlettered lovers free of charge, writing their love 
missives for them in the Arcade of the Scribes. That is where he went after work. He 
would take off his frock coat with his circumspect gestures and hang it over the back of 
the chair, he would put on the cuffs so he would not dirty his shirt sleeves, he would 
unbutton his vest so he could think better, and sometimes until very late at night he would 
encourage the hopeless with letters of mad adoration. From time to time he would be ap



proached by a poor woman who had a problem with one of her children, a war veteran 
who persisted in demanding payment of his pension, someone who had been robbed and 
wanted to file a complaint with the government, but no matter how he tried, he could not 
satisfy them, because the only convincing document he could write was a love letter. He 
did not even ask his new clients any questions, because all he had to do was look at the 
whites of their eyes to know what their problem was, and he would write page after page 
of uncontrolled love, following the infallible formula of writing as he thought about 
Fermina Daza and nothing but Fermina Daza. After the first month he had to establish a 
system of appointments made in advance so that he would not be swamped by yearning 
lovers. 

His most pleasant memory of that time was of a very timid young girl, almost a child, 
who trembled as she asked him to write an answer to an irresistible letter that she had just 
received, and that Florentino Ariza recognized as one he had written on the previous 
afternoon. He answered it in a different style, one that was in tune with the emotions and 
the age of the girl, and in a hand that also seemed to be hers, for he knew how to create a 
handwriting for every occasion, according to the character of each person. He wrote, 
imagining to himself what Fermina Daza would have said to him if she had loved him as 
much as that helpless child loved her suitor. Two days later, of course, he had to write the 
boy’s reply with the same hand, style, and kind of love that he had attributed to him in the 
first letter, and so it was that he became involved in a feverish correspondence with 
himself. Before a month had passed, each came to him separately to thank him for what 
he himself had proposed in the boy’s letter and accepted with devotion in the girl’s 
response: they were going to marry. 

Only when they had their first child did they realize, after a casual conversation, that 
their letters had been written by the same scribe, and for the first time they went together 
to the Arcade to ask him to be the child’s godfather. Florentino Ariza was so enraptured 
by the practical evidence of his dreams that he used time he did not have to write a 
Lovers’ Companion that was more poetic and extensive than the one sold in doorways for 
twenty centavos and that half the city knew by heart. He categorized all the imaginable 
situations in which he and Fermina Daza might find themselves, and for all of them he 
wrote as many models and alternatives as he could think of. When he finished, he had 
some thousand letters in three volumes as complete as the Covarrubias Dictionary, but no 
printer in the city would take the risk of publishing them, and they ended up in an attic 
along with other papers from the past, for Tránsito Ariza flatly refused to dig out the 
earthenware jars and squander the savings of a lifetime on a mad publishing venture. 
Years later, when Florentino Ariza had the resources to publish the book himself, it was 
difficult for him to accept the reality that love letters had gone out of fashion. 

As he was starting out in the River Company of the Caribbean and writing letters free 
of charge in the Arcade of the Scribes, the friends of Florentino Ariza’s youth were 
certain that they were slowly losing him beyond recall. And they were right. When he 
returned from his voyage along the river, he still saw some of them in the hope of dimming 
the memory of Fermina Daza, he played billiards with them, he went to their 
dances, he allowed himself to be raffled off among the girls, he allowed himself to do 
everything he thought would help him to become the man he had once been. Later, when 
Uncle Leo XII took him on as an employee, he played dominoes with his officemates in 
the Commercial Club, and they began to accept him as one of their own when he spoke to 


them of nothing but the navigation company, which he did not call by its complete name 
but by its initials: the R C.C. He even changed the way he ate. As indifferent and 
irregular as he had been until then regarding food, that was how habitual and austere he 
became until the end of his days: a large cup of black coffee for breakfast, a slice of 
poached fish with white rice for lunch, a cup of café con leche and a piece of cheese 
before going to bed. He drank black coffee at any hour, anywhere, under any 
circumstances, as many as thirty little cups a day: a brew like crude oil which he 
preferred to prepare himself and which he always kept near at hand in a thermos. He was 
another person, despite his firm decision and anguished efforts to continue to be the same 
man he had been before his mortal encounter with love. 

The truth is that he was never the same again. Winning back Fermina Daza was the 
sole purpose of his life, and he was so certain of achieving it sooner or later that he 
convinced Tránsito Ariza to continue with the restoration of the house so that it would be 
ready to receive her whenever the miracle took place. In contrast to her reaction to the 
proposed publication of the Lovers’ Companion, Tránsito Ariza went much further: she 
bought the house at once and undertook a complete renovation. They made a reception 
room where the bedroom had been, on the upper floor they built two spacious, bright 
bedrooms, one for the married couple and another for the children they were going to 
have, and in the space where the old tobacco factory had been they put in an extensive 
garden with all kinds of roses, which Florentino Ariza himself tended during his free time 
at dawn. The only thing they left intact, as a kind of testimony of gratitude to the past, 
was the notions shop. The back room where Florentino Ariza had slept they left as it had 
always been, with the hammock hanging and the writing table covered with untidy piles 
of books, but he moved to the room planned as the conjugal bedroom on the upper floor. 
This was the largest and airiest in the house, and it had an interior terrace where it was 
pleasant to sit at night because of the sea breeze and the scent of the rosebushes, but it 
was also the room that best reflected Florentino Ariza’s Trappist severity. The plain 
whitewashed walls were rough and unadorned, and the only furniture was a prison cot, a 
night table with a candle in a bottle, an old wardrobe, and a washstand with its basin and 
bowl. 

The work took almost three years, and it coincided with a brief civic revival owing to 
the boom in river navigation and trade, the same factors that had maintained the city’s 
greatness during colonial times and for more than two centuries had made her the 
gateway to America. But that was also the period when Tránsito Ariza manifested the 
first symptoms of her incurable disease. Her regular clients were older, paler, and more 
faded each time they came to the notions shop, and she did not recognize them after 
dealing with them for half a lifetime, or she confused the affairs of one with those of 
another, which was a very grave matter in a business like hers, in which no papers were 
signed to protect her honor or theirs, and one’s word of honor was given and accepted as 
sufficient guarantee. At first it seemed she was growing deaf, but it soon became evident 
that her memory was trickling away. And so she liquidated her pawn business, the 
treasure in the jars paid for completing and furnishing the house, and still left over were 
many of the most valuable old jewels in the city, whose owners did not have funds to 
redeem them. 

During this period Florentino Ariza had to attend to too many responsibilities at the 
same time, but his spirits never flagged as he sought to expand his work as a furtive 


hunter. After his erratic experience with the Widow Nazaret, which opened the door to 
street love, he continued to hunt the abandoned little birds of the night for several years, 
still hoping to find a cure for the pain of Fermina Daza. But by then he could no longer 
tell if his habit of fornicating without hope was a mental necessity or a simple vice of the 
body. His visits to the transient hotel became less frequent, not only because his interests 
lay elsewhere but because he did not like them to see him there under circumstances that 
were different from the chaste domesticity of the past. Nevertheless, in three emergency 
situations he had recourse to the simple strategy of an era before his time: he disguised 
his friends, who were afraid of being recognized, as men, and they walked into the hotel 
together as if they were two gentlemen out on the town. Yet on two of these occasions 
someone realized that he and his presumptive male companion did not go to the bar but to 
a room, and the already tarnished reputation of Florentino Ariza received the coup de 
grace. At last he stopped going there, except for the very few times he did so not to catch 
up on what he had missed but for just the opposite reason: to find a refuge where he could 
recuperate from his excesses. 

And it was just as well. No sooner did he leave his office at five in the afternoon than 
he began to hunt like a chicken hawk. At first he was content with what the night 
provided. He picked up serving girls in the parks, black women in the market, 
sophisticated young ladies from the interior on the beaches, gringas on the boats from 
New Orleans. He took them to the jetties where half the city also went after nightfall, he 
took them wherever he could, and sometimes even where he could not, and not 
infrequently he had to hurry into a dark entryway and do what he could, however he 
could do it, behind the gate. 

The lighthouse was always a blessed refuge in a storm, which he evoked with nostalgia 
in the dawn of his old age when he had everything settled, because it was a good place to 
be happy, above all at night, and he thought that something of his loves from that time 
flashed out to the sailors with every turn of the light. So that he continued to go there 
more than to any other spot, while his friend the lighthouse keeper was delighted to 
receive him with a simpleminded expression on his face that was the best guarantee of 
discretion for the frightened little birds. There was a house at the foot of the tower, close 
to the thunder of the waves breaking against the cliffs, where love was more intense 
because it seemed like a shipwreck. But Florentino Ariza preferred the light tower itself, 
late at night, because one could see the entire city and the trail of lights on the fishing 
boats at sea, and even in the distant swamps. 

It was in those days that he devised his rather simplistic theories concerning the 
relationship between a woman’s appearance and her aptitude for love. He distrusted the 
sensual type, the ones who looked as if they could eat an alligator raw and tended to be 
the most passive in bed. The type he preferred was just the opposite: those skinny little 
tadpoles that no one bothered to turn around and look at in the street, who seemed to 
disappear when they took off their clothes, who made you feel sorry for them when their 
bones cracked at the first impact, and yet who could leave the man who bragged the most 
about his virility ready for the trashcan. He had made notes of these premature 
observations, intending to write a practical supplement to the Lovers’ Companion, but the 
project met the same fate as the previous one after Ausencia Santander sent him tumbling 
with her old dog’s wisdom, stood him on his head, tossed him up and threw him down, 
made him as good as new, shattered all his virtuous theories, and taught him the only 


thing he had to learn about love: that nobody teaches life anything. 

Ausencia Santander had had a conventional marriage for twenty years, which left her 
with three children who had married and had children in turn, so that she boasted of being 
the grandmother with the best bed in the city. It was never clear if she had abandoned her 
husband, or if he had abandoned her, or if they had abandoned each other at the same 
time, but he went to live with his regular mistress, and then she felt free, in the middle of 
the day and at the front door, to receive Rosendo de la Rosa, a riverboat captain whom 
she had often received in the middle of the night at the back door. Without giving the 
matter a second thought, he brought Florentino Ariza to meet her. 

He brought him for lunch. He also brought a demijohn of homemade aguardiente and 
ingredients of the highest quality for an epic sancocho, the kind that was possible only 
with chickens from the patio, meat with tender bones, rubbish-heap pork, and greens and 
vegetables from the towns along the river. Nevertheless, from the very first, Florentino 
Ariza was not as enthusiastic about the excellence of the cuisine or the exuberance of the 
lady of the house as he was about the beauty of the house itself. He liked her because of 
her house, bright and cool, with four large windows facing the sea and beyond that a 
complete view of the old city. He liked the quantity and the splendor of the things that 
gave the living room a confused and at the same time rigorous appearance, with all kinds 
of handcrafted objects that Captain Rosendo de la Rosa brought back from each trip until 
there was no room left for another piece. On the sea terrace, sitting on his private ring, 
was a cockatoo from Malaya, with unbelievable white plumage and a pensive tranquillity 
that gave one much to think about: it was the most beautiful animal that Florentino Ariza 
had ever seen. 

Captain Rosendo de la Rosa was enthusiastic about his guest’s enthusiasm, and he told 
him in detail the history of each object. As he spoke he sipped aguardiente without pause. 
He seemed to be made of reinforced concrete: he was enormous, with hair all over his 
body except on his head, a mustache like a housepainter’s brush, a voice like a capstan, 
which would have been his alone, and an exquisite courtesy. But not even his body could 
resist the way he drank. Before they sat down to the table he had finished half of the 
demijohn, and he fell forward onto the tray of glasses and bottles with a slow sound of 
demolition. Ausencia Santander had to ask Florentino Ariza to help her drag the inert 
body of the beached whale to bed and undress him as he slept. Then, in a flash of 
inspiration that they attributed to a conjunction of their stars, the two of them undressed 
in the next room without agreeing to, without even suggesting it or proposing it to each 
other, and for more than seven years they continued undressing wherever they could 
while the Captain was on a trip. There was no danger of his surprising them, because he 
had the good sailor’s habit of advising the port of his arrival by sounding the ship’s horn, 
even at dawn, first with three long howls for his wife and nine children, and then with 
two short, melancholy ones for his mistress. 

Ausencia Santander was almost fifty years old and looked it, but she had such a 
personal instinct for love that no homegrown or scientific theories could interfere with it. 
Florentino Ariza knew from the ship’s itineraries when he could visit her, and he always 
went unannounced, whenever he wanted to, at any hour of the day or night, and never 
once was she not waiting for him. She would open the door as her mother had raised her 
until she was seven years old: stark naked, with an organdy ribbon in her hair. She would 
not let him take another step until she had undressed him, because she thought it was bad 


luck to have a clothed man in the house. This was the cause of constant discord with 
Captain Rosendo de la Rosa, because he had the superstitious belief that smoking naked 
brought bad luck, and at times he preferred to put off love rather than put out his 
inevitable Cuban cigar. On the other hand, Florentino Ariza was very taken with the 
charms of nudity, and she removed his clothes with sure delight as soon as she closed the 
door, not even giving him time to greet her, or to take off his hat or his glasses, kissing 
him and letting him kiss her with sharp-toothed kisses, unfastening his clothes from 
bottom to top, first the buttons of his fly, one by one after each kiss, then his belt buckle, 
and at the last his vest and shirt, until he was like a live fish that had been slit open from 
head to tail. Then she sat him in the living room and took off his boots, pulled on his 
trouser cuffs so that she could take off his pants while she removed his long underwear, 
and at last she undid the garters around his calves and took off his socks. Then Florentino 
Ariza stopped kissing her and letting her kiss him so that he could do the only thing he 
was responsible for in that precise ceremony: he took his watch and chain out of the 
buttonhole in his vest and took off his glasses and put them in his boots so he would be 
sure not to forget them. He always took that precaution, always without fail, whenever he 
undressed in someone else’s house. 

As soon as he had done that, she attacked him without giving him time for anything 
else, there on the same sofa where she had just undressed him, and only on rare occasions 
in the bed. She mounted him and took control of all of him for all of her, absorbed in 
herself, her eyes closed, gauging the situation in her absolute inner darkness, advancing 
here, retreating there, correcting her invisible route, trying another, more intense path, 
another means of proceeding without drowning in the slimy marsh that flowed from her 
womb, droning like a horsefly as she asked herself questions and answered in her native 
jargon; where was that something in the shadows that only she knew about and that she 
longed for just for herself, until she succumbed without waiting for anybody, she fell 
alone into her abyss with a jubilant explosion of total victory that made the world 
tremble. Florentino Ariza was left exhausted, incomplete, floating in a puddle of their 
perspiration, but with the impression of being no more than an instrument of pleasure. He 
would say: “You treat me as if I were just anybody.” She would roar with the laughter of 
a free female and say: “Not at all: as if you were nobody.” He was left with the 
impression that she took away everything with mean-spirited greed, and his pride would 
rebel and he would leave the house determined never to return. But then he would wake 
for no reason in the middle of the night, and the memory of the self-absorbed love of 
Ausencia Santander was revealed to him for what it was: a pitfall of happiness that he 
despised and desired at the same time, but from which it was impossible to escape. 

One Sunday, two years after they met, the first thing she did when he arrived was to 
take off his glasses instead of undressing him, so that she could kiss him with greater 
ease, and this was how Florentino Ariza learned that she had begun to love him. Despite 
the fact that from the first day he had felt very comfortable in the house that he now loved 
as if it were his own, he had never stayed longer than two hours, and he had never slept 
there, and he had eaten there only once because she had given him a formal invitation. He 
went there, in fact, only for what he had come for, always bringing his only gift, a single 
rose, and then he would disappear until the next unforeseeable time. But on the Sunday 
when she took off his glasses to kiss him, in part because of that and in part because they 
fell asleep after gentle love-making, they spent the afternoon naked in the Captain’s 


enormous bed. When he awoke from his nap, Florentino Ariza still remembered the 
shrieking of the cockatoo, whose strident calls belied his beauty. But the silence was 
diaphanous in the four o’clock heat, and through the bedroom window one could see the 
outline of the old city with the afternoon sun at its back, its golden domes, its sea in 
flames all the way to Jamaica. Ausencia Santander stretched out an adventurous hand, 
seeking the sleeping beast, but Florentino Ariza moved it away. He said: “Not now. I feel 
something strange, as if someone were watching us.” She aroused the cockatoo again 
with her joyous laughter. She said: “Not even Jonah’s wife would swallow that story.” 
Neither did she, of course, but she admitted it was a good one, and the two of them loved 
each other for a long time in silence without making love again. At five o’clock, with the 
sun still high, she jumped out of bed, naked as always and with the organdy ribbon in her 
hair, and went to find something to drink in the kitchen. But she had not taken a single 
step out of the bedroom when she screamed in horror. 

She could not believe it. The only objects left in the house were the lamps attached to 
the walls. All the rest, the signed furniture, the Indian rugs, the statues and the handwoven 
tapestries, the countless trinkets made of precious stones and metals, everything 
that had made hers one of the most pleasant and best decorated houses in the city, 
everything, even the sacred cockatoo, everything had vanished. It had been carried out 
through the sea terrace without disturbing their love. All that was left were empty rooms 
with the four open windows, and a message painted on the rear wall: This is what you get 
for fucking around. Captain Rosendo de la Rosa could never understand why Ausencia 
Santander did not report the robbery, or try to get in touch with the dealers in stolen 
goods, or permit her misfortune to be mentioned again. 

Florentino Ariza continued to visit her in the looted house, whose furnishings were 
reduced to three leather stools that the thieves forgot in the kitchen, and the contents of 
the bedroom where the two of them had been. But he did not visit her as often as before, 
not because of the desolation in the house, as she supposed and as she said to him, but 
because of the novelty of a mule-drawn trolley at the turn of the new century, which 
proved to be a prodigious and original nest of free-flying little birds. He rode it four times 
a day, twice to go to the office, twice to return home, and sometimes when his reading 
was real, and most of the time when it was pretense, he would take the first steps, at least, 
toward a future tryst. Later, when Uncle Leo XII put at his disposal a carriage drawn by 
two little gray mules with golden trappings, just like the one that belonged to President 
Rafael Núñez, he would long for those times on the trolley as the most fruitful of all his 
adventures in falconry. He was right: there is no worse enemy of secret love than a 
carriage waiting at the door. In fact, he almost always left it hidden at his house and made 
his hawkish rounds On foot so that he would not leave wheel marks in the dust. That is 
why he evoked with such great nostalgia the old trolley with its emaciated mules covered 
with sores, in which a sideways glance was all one needed to know where love was. 
However, in the midst of so many tender memories, he could not elude his recollection of 
a helpless little bird whose name he never knew and with whom he spent no more than 
half a frenetic night, but that had been enough to ruin the innocent rowdiness of Carnival 
for him for the rest of his life. 

She had attracted his attention on the trolley for the fearlessness with which she 
traveled through the riotous public celebration. She could not have been more than 
twenty years old, and she did not seem to share the spirit of Carnival, unless she was 


disguised as an invalid: her hair was very light, long, and straight, hanging loose over her 
shoulders, and she wore a tunic of plain, unadorned linen. She was completely removed 
from the confusion of music in the streets, the handfuls of rice powder, the showers of 
aniline thrown at the passengers on the trolley, whose mules were whitened with 
cornstarch and wore flowered hats during those three days of madness. Taking advantage 
of the confusion, Florentino Ariza invited her to have an ice with him, because he did not 
think he could ask for anything more. She looked at him without surprise. She said: “I am 
happy to accept, but I warn you that I am crazy.” He laughed at her witticism, and took 
her to see the parade of floats from the balcony of the ice cream shop. Then he put on a 
rented cape, and the two of them joined the dancing in the Plaza of the Customhouse, and 
enjoyed themselves like newborn sweethearts, for her indifference went to the opposite 
extreme in the uproar of the night: she danced like a professional, she was imaginative 
and daring in her revelry, and she had devastating charm. 

“You don’t know the trouble you’ve gotten into with me,” she shouted, laughing in the 
fever of Carnival. “I’m a crazy woman from the insane asylum.” 

For Florentino Ariza, that night was a return to the innocent unruliness of adolescence, 
when he had not yet been wounded by love. But he knew, more from hearsay than from 
personal experience, that such easy happiness could not last very long. And so before the 
night began to degenerate, as it always did after prizes were distributed for the best 
costumes, he suggested to the girl that they go to the lighthouse to watch the sunrise. She 
accepted with pleasure, but she wanted to wait until after they had given out the prizes. 

Florentino Ariza was certain that the delay saved his life. In fact, the girl had indicated 
to him that they should leave for the lighthouse, when she was seized by two guards and a 
nurse from Divine Shepherdess Asylum. They had been looking for her since her escape 
at three o’clock that afternoon--they and the entire police force. She had decapitated a 
guard and seriously wounded two others with a machete that she had snatched away from 
the gardener because she wanted to go dancing at Carnival. It had not occurred to anyone 
that she might be dancing in the streets; they thought she would be hiding in one of the 
many houses where they had searched even the cisterns. 

It was not easy to take her away. She defended herself with a pair of gardening shears 
that she had hidden in her bodice, and six men were needed to put her in the strait jacket 
while the crowd jammed into the Plaza of the Customhouse applauded and whistled with 
glee in the belief that the bloody capture was one of many Carnival farces. Florentino 
Ariza was heartbroken, and beginning on Ash Wednesday he would walk down Divine 
Shepherdess Street with a box of English chocolates for her. He would stand and look at 
the inmates, who shouted all kinds of profanities and compliments at him through the 
windows, and he would show them the box of chocolates in case luck would have it that 
she, too, might look out at him through the iron bars. But he never saw her. Months later, 
as he was getting off the mule-drawn trolley, a little girl walking with her father asked 
him for a piece of chocolate from the box he was carrying in his hand. Her father 
reprimanded her and begged Florentino Ariza’s pardon. But he gave the whole box to the 
child, thinking that the action would redeem him from all bitterness, and he soothed the 
father with a pat on the back. 

“They were for a love that has gone all to hell,” he said. 

As a kind of compensation from fate, it was also in the mule-drawn trolley that 
Florentino Ariza met Leona Cassiani, who was the true woman in his life although 


neither of them ever knew it and they never made love. He had sensed her before he saw 
her as he was going home on the trolley at five o’clock; it was a tangible look that 
touched him as if it were a finger. He raised his eyes and saw her, at the far end of the 
trolley, but standing out with great clarity from the other passengers. She did not look 
away. On the contrary: she continued to look at him with such boldness that he could not 
help thinking what he thought: black, young, pretty, but a whore beyond the shadow of a 
doubt. He rejected her from his life, because he could not conceive of anything more 
contemptible than paying for love: he had never done it. 

Florentino Ariza got off at the Plaza of the Carriages, which was the end of the line, 
hurried through the labyrinth of commerce because his mother was expecting him at six, 
and when he emerged on the other side of the crowd, he heard the tapping heels of a 
loose woman on the paving stones and turned around so that he would be certain of what 
he already knew: it was she, dressed like the slave girls in engravings, with a skirt of veils 
that was raised with the gesture of a dancer when she stepped over the puddles in the 
streets, a low-cut top that left her shoulders bare, a handful of colored necklaces, and a 
white turban. He knew them from the transient hotel. It often happened that at six in the 
afternoon they were still eating breakfast, and then all they could do was to use sex as if it 
were a bandit’s knife and put it to the throat of the first man they passed on the street: 
your prick or your life. As a final test, Florentino Ariza changed direction and went down 
the deserted Oil Lamp Alley, and she followed, coming closer and closer to him. Then he 
stopped, turned around, blocked her way on the sidewalk, and leaned on his umbrella 
with both hands. She stood facing him. 

“You made a mistake, good-looking,” he said. “I don’t do that.” 

“Of course you do,” she said. “One can see it in your face.” 

Florentino Ariza remembered a phrase from his childhood, something that the family 
doctor, his godfather, had said regarding his chronic constipation: “The world is divided 
into those who can shit and those who cannot.” On the basis of this dogma the Doctor had 
elaborated an entire theory of character, which he considered more accurate than 
astrology. But with what he had learned over the years, Florentino Ariza stated it another 
way: “The world is divided into those who screw and those who do not.” He distrusted 
those who did not: when they strayed from the straight and narrow, it was something so 
unusual for them that they bragged about love as if they had just invented it. Those who 
did it often, on the other hand, lived for that alone. They felt so good that their lips were 
sealed as if they were tombs, because they knew that their lives depended on their discretion. 
They never spoke of their exploits, they confided in no one, they feigned 
indifference to the point where they earned the reputation of being impotent, or frigid, or 
above all timid fairies, as in the case of Florentino Ariza. But they took pleasure in the 
error because the error protected them. They formed a secret society, whose members 
recognized each other all over the world without need of a common language, which is 
why Florentino Ariza was not surprised by the girl’s reply: she was one of them, and 
therefore she knew that he knew that she knew. 

It was the great mistake of his life, as his conscience was to remind him every hour of 
every day until the final day of his life. What she wanted from him was not love, least of 
all love that was paid for, but a job, any kind of job, at any salary, in the River Company 
of the Caribbean. Florentino Ariza felt so ashamed of his own conduct that he took her to 
the head of Personnel, who gave her the lowest-level job in the General Section, which 


she performed with seriousness, modesty, and dedication for three years. 

Ever since its founding, the R.C.C. had had its offices across from the river dock, and it 
had nothing in common with the port for ocean liners on the opposite side of the bay, or 
with the market pier on Las Ánimas Bay. The building was of wood, with a sloping tin 
roof, a single long balcony with columns at the front, and windows, covered with wire 
mesh, on all four sides through which one had complete views of the boats at the dock as 
if they were paintings hanging on the wall. When the German founders built it, they 
painted the tin roof red and the wooden walls a brilliant white, so that the building itself 
bore some resemblance to a riverboat. Later it was painted all blue, and at the time that 
Florentino Ariza began to work for the company it was a dusty shed of no definite color, 
and on the rusting roof there were patches of new tin plates over the original ones. 
Behind the building, in a gravel patio surrounded by chicken wire, stood two large 
warehouses of more recent construction, and at the back there was a closed sewer pipe, 
dirty and foul-smelling, where the refuse of a half a century of river navigation lay 
rotting: the debris of historic boats, from the early one with a single smokestack, 
christened by Simón Bolívar, to some so recent that they had electric fans in the cabins. 
Most of them had been dismantled for materials to be used in building other boats, but 
many were in such good condition that it seemed possible to give them a coat of paint 
and launch them without frightening away the iguanas or disturbing the foliage of the 
large yellow flowers that made them even more nostalgic. 

The Administrative Section was on the upper floor of the building, in small but 
comfortable and well-appointed offices similar to the cabins on the boats, for they had 
been built not by civil architects but by naval engineers. At the end of the corridor, like 
any employee, Uncle Leo XII dispatched his business in an office similar to all the 
others, the one exception being that every morning he found a glass vase filled with 
sweet-smelling flowers on his desk. On the ground floor was the Passenger Section, with 
a waiting room that had rustic benches and a count er for selling tickets and handling 
baggage. Last of all was the confusing General Section, its name alone suggesting the 
vagueness of its functions, where problems that had not been solved elsewhere in the 
company went to die an ignominious death. There sat Leona Cassiani, lost behind a 
student’s desk surrounded by corn stacked for shipping and unresolved papers, on the day 
that Uncle Leo XII himself went to see what the devil he could think of to make the 
General Section good for something. After three hours of questions, theoretical 
assumptions, and concrete evidence, with all the employees in the middle of the room, he 
returned to his office tormented by the certainty that instead of a solution to so many 
problems, he had found just the opposite: new and different problems with no solution. 

The next day, when Florentino Ariza came into his office, he found a memorandum 
from Leona Cassiani, with the request that he study it and then show it to his uncle if he 
thought it appropriate. She was the only one who had not said a word during the 
inspection the previous afternoon. She had remained silent in full awareness of the worth 
of her position as a charity employee, but in the memorandum she noted that she had said 
nothing not because of negligence but out of respect for the hierarchies in the section. It 
had an alarming simplicity. Uncle Leo XII had proposed a thorough reorganization, but 
Leona Cassiani did not agree, for the simple reason that in reality the General Section did 
not exist: it was the dumping ground for annoying but minor problems that the other 
sections wanted to get rid of. As a consequence, the solution was to eliminate the General 


Section and return the problems to the sections where they had originated, to be solved 
there. 

Uncle Leo XII did not have the slightest idea who Leona Cassiani was, and he could 
not remember having seen anyone who could be Leona Cassiani at the meeting on the 
previous afternoon, but when he read the memorandum he called her to his office and 
talked with her behind closed doors for two hours. They spoke about everything, in 
accordance with the method he used to learn about people. The memorandum showed 
simple common sense, and her suggestion, in fact, would produce the desired result. But 
Uncle Leo XII was not interested in that: he was interested in her. What most attracted 
his attention was that her only education after elementary school had been in the School 
of Millinery. Moreover, she was learning English at home, using an accelerated method 
with no teacher, and for the past three months she had been taking evening classes in 
typing, a new kind of work with a wonderful future, as they used to say about the 
telegraph and before that the steam engine. 

When she left the meeting, Uncle Leo XII had already begun to call her what he would 
always call her: my namesake Leona. He had decided to eliminate with the stroke of a 
pen the troublesome section and distribute the problems so that they could be solved by 
the people who had created them, in accordance with Leona Cassiani’s suggestion, and 
he had created a new position for her, which had no title or specific duties but in effect 
was his Personal Assistant. That afternoon, after the inglorious burial of the General 
Section, Uncle Leo XII asked Florentino Ariza where he had found Leona Cassiani, and 
he answered with the truth. 

“Well, then, go back to the trolley and bring me every girl like her that you find,” his 
uncle said. “With two or three more, we’ll salvage your galleon.” 

Florentino Ariza took this as one of Uncle Leo XII’s typical jokes, but the next day he 
found himself without the carriage that had been assigned to him six months earlier, and 
that was taken back now so that he could continue to look for hidden talent on the 
trolleys. Leona Cassiani, for her part, soon overcame her initial scruples, and she revealed 
what she had kept hidden with so much astuteness during her first three years. In three 
more years she had taken control of everything, and in the next four she stood on the 
threshold of the General Secretaryship, but she refused to cross it because it was only one 
step below Florentino Ariza. Until then she had taken orders from him, and she wanted to 
continue to do so, although the fact of the matter was that Florentino himself did not 
realize that he took orders from her. Indeed, he had done nothing more on the Board of 
Directors than follow her suggestions, which helped him to move up despite the traps set 
by his secret enemies. 

Leona Cassiani had a diabolical talent for handling secrets, and she always knew how 
to be where she had to be at the right time. She was dynamic and quiet, with a wise 
sweetness. But when it was indispensable she would, with sorrow in her heart, give free 
rein to a character of solid iron. However, she never did that for herself. Her only 
objective was to clear the ladder at any cost, with blood if necessary, so that Florentino 
Ariza could move up to the position he had proposed for himself without calculating his 
own strength very well. She would have done this in any event, of course, because she 
had an indomitable will to power, but the truth was that she did it consciously, out of 
simple gratitude. Her determination was so great that Florentino Ariza himself lost his 
way in her schemes, and on one unfortunate occasion he attempted to block her, thinking 


that she was trying to do the same to him. Leona Cassiani put him in his place. 

“Make no mistake,” she said to him. “I will withdraw from all this whenever you wish, 
but think it over carefully.” 

Florentino Ariza, who in fact had never thought about it, thought about it then, as well 
as he could, and he surrendered his weapons. The truth is that in the midst of that sordid 
internecine battle in a company in perpetual crisis, in the midst of his disasters as a 
tireless falconer and the more and more uncertain dream of Fermina Daza, the impassive 
Florentino Ariza had not had a moment of inner peace as he confronted the fascinating 
spectacle of that fierce black woman smeared with shit and love in the fever of battle. 
Many times he regretted in secret that she had not been in fact what he thought she was 
on the afternoon he met her, so that he could wipe his ass with his principles and make 
love to her even if it cost nuggets of shining gold. For Leona Cassiani was still the 
woman she had been that afternoon on the trolley, with the same clothes, worthy of an 
impetuous runaway slave, her mad turbans, her earrings and bracelets made of bone, her 
necklaces, her rings with fake stones on every finger: a lioness in the streets. The years 
had changed her appearance very little, and that little became her very well. She moved 
in splendid maturity, her feminine charms were even more exciting, and her ardent 
African body was becoming more compact. Florentino Ariza had made no propositions to 
her in ten years, a hard penance for his original error, and she had helped him in 
everything except that. 

One night when he had worked late, something he did often after his mother’s death, 
Florentino Ariza was about to leave when he saw a light burning in Leona Cassiani’s 
office. He opened the door without knocking, and there she was: alone at her desk, 
absorbed, serious, with the new eyeglasses that gave her an academic air. Florentino 
Ariza realized with joyful fear that the two of them were alone in the building, the piers 
were deserted, the city asleep, the night eternal over the dark sea, and the horn mournful 
on the ship that would not dock for another hour. Florentino Ariza leaned both hands on 
his umbrella, just as he had done in Oil Lamp Alley when he barred her way, only now he 
did it to hide the trembling in his knees. 

“Tell me something, lionlady of my soul,” he said. “When are we ever going to stop 
this?” 

She took off her glasses without surprise, with absolute self-control, and dazzled him 
with her solar laugh. It was the first time she used the familiar form of address with him. 

“Ay, Florentino Ariza,” she said, “I’ve been sitting here for ten years waiting for you to 
ask me that.” 

It was too late: the opportunity had been there with her in the mule-drawn trolley, it 
had always been with her there on the chair where she was sitting, but now it was gone 
forever. The truth was that after all the dirty tricks she had done for him, after so much 
sordidness endured for him, she had moved on in life and was far beyond his twenty-year 
advantage in age: she had grown too old for him. She loved him so much that instead of 
deceiving him she preferred to continue loving him, although she had to let him know in 
a brutal manner. 

“No,” she said to him. “I would feel as if I were going to bed with the son I never had.” 

Florentino Ariza was left with the nagging suspicion that this was not her last word. He 
believed that when a woman says no, she is waiting to be urged before making her final 
decision, but with her he could not risk making the same mistake twice. He withdrew 


without protest, and even with a certain grace, which was not easy for him. From that 
night on, any cloud there might have been between them was dissipated without 
bitterness, and Florentino Ariza understood at last that it is possible to be a woman’s 
friend and not go to bed with her. 

Leona Cassiani was the only human being to whom Florentino Ariza was tempted to 
reveal the secret of Fermina Daza. The few people who had known were beginning to 
forget for reasons over which they had no control. Three of them were, beyond the 
shadow of any doubt, in the grave: his mother, whose memory had been erased long 
before she died; Gala Placidia, who had died of old age in the service of one who had 
been like a daughter to her; and the unforgettable Escolástica Daza, the woman who had 
brought him the first love letter he had ever received in his life, hidden in her prayerbook, 
and who could not still be alive after so many years. Lorenzo Daza (no one knew if he 
was alive or dead) might have revealed the secret to Sister Franca de la Luz when he was 
trying to stop Fermina Daza’s expulsion, but it was unlikely that it had gone any further. 
That left the eleven telegraph operators in Hildebranda Sanchez’s province who had 
handled telegrams with their complete names and exact addresses, and Hildebranda 
Sánchez herself, and her court of indomitable cousins. 

What Florentino Ariza did not know was that Dr. Juvenal Urbino should have been 
included on the list. Hildebranda Sánchez had revealed the secret to him during one of 
her many visits in the early years. But she did so in such a casual way and at such an 
inopportune moment that it did not go in one of Dr. Urbino’s ears and out the other, as 
she thought; it did not go in at all. Hildebranda had mentioned Florentino Ariza as one of 
the secret poets who, in her opinion, might win the Poetic Festival. Dr. Urbino could not 
remember who he was, and she told him--she did not need to, but there was no hint of 
malice in it--that he was Fermina Daza’s only sweetheart before she married. She told 
him, convinced that it had been something so innocent and ephemeral that in fact it was 
rather touching. Dr. Urbino replied without looking at her: “I did not know that fellow 
was a poet.” And then he wiped him from his memory, because among other things, his 
profession had accustomed him to the ethical management of forgetfulness. 

Florentino Ariza observed that, with the exception of his mother, the keepers of the 
secret belonged to Fermina Daza’s world. In his, he was alone with the crushing weight 
of a burden that he had often needed to share, but until then there had been no one worthy 
of so much trust. Leona Cassiani was the only one, and all he needed was the opportunity 
and the means. This was what he was thinking on the hot summer afternoon when Dr. 
Juvenal Urbino climbed the steep stairs of the R.C.C., paused on each step in order to 
survive the three o’clock heat, appeared in Florentino Ariza’s office, panting and soaked 
with perspiration down to his trousers, and gasped with his last breath: “I believe a 
cyclone is coming.” Florentino Ariza had seen him there many times, asking for Uncle 
Leo XII, but never until now had it seemed so clear to him that this uninvited guest had 
something to do with his life. 

This was during the time that Dr. Juvenal Urbino had overcome the pitfalls of his 
profession, and was going from door to door, almost like a beggar with his hat in his 
hand, asking for contributions to his artistic enterprises. Uncle Leo XII had always been 
one of his most faithful and generous contributors, but just at that moment he had begun 
his daily ten-minute siesta, sitting in the swivel chair at his desk. Florentino Ariza asked 
Dr. Juvenal Urbino to please wait in his office, which was next to Uncle Leo XII’s and, in 


a certain sense, served as his waiting room. 

They had seen each other on various occasions, but they had never before been face to 
face as they were now, and once again Florentino Ariza experienced the nausea of feeling 
himself inferior. The ten minutes were an eternity, during which he stood up three times 
in the hope that his uncle had awakened early, and he drank an entire thermos of black 
coffee. Dr. Urbino refused to drink even a single cup. He said: “Coffee is poison.” And 
he continued to chat about one thing and another and did not even care if anyone was 
listening to him. Florentino Ariza could not bear his natural distinction, the fluidity and 
precision of his words, his faint scent of camphor, his personal charm, the easy and 
elegant manner in which he made his most frivolous sentences seem essential only 
because he had said them. Then, without warning, the Doctor changed the subject. 

“Do you like music?” 

He was taken by surprise. In reality, Florentino Ariza attended every concert and opera 
performed in the city, but he did not feel capable of engaging in a critical or well-
informed discussion. He had a weakness for popular music, above all sentimental 
waltzes, whose similarity to the ones he had composed as an adolescent, or to his secret 
verses, could not be denied. He had only to hear them once, and then for nights on end 
there was no power in heaven or earth that could shake the melody out of his head. But 
that would not be a serious answer to a serious question put to him by a specialist. 

“I like Gardel,” he said. 

Dr. Urbino understood. “I see,” he said. “He is popular.” And he slipped into a 
recounting of his many new projects which, as always, had to be realized without official 
backing. He called to his attention the disheartening inferiority of the performances that 
could be heard here now, compared with the splendid ones of the previous century. That 
was true: he had spent a year selling subscriptions to bring the Cortot-Casals-Thibaud trio 
to the Dramatic Theater, and there was no one in the government who even knew who 
they were, while this very month there were no seats left for the Ramón Caralt company 
that performed detective dramas, for the Operetta and Zarzuela Company of Don Manolo 
de la Presa, for the Santanelas, ineffable mimics, illusionists, and artistes, who could 
change their clothes on stage in the wink of an eye, for Danyse D’Altaine, advertised as a 
former dancer with the Folies-Bergère, and even for the abominable Ursus, a Basque 
madman who took on a fighting bull all by himself. There was no reason to complain, 
however, if the Europeans themselves were once again setting the bad example of a 
barbaric war when we had begun to live in peace after nine civil wars in half a century, 
which, if the truth were told, were all one war: always the same war. What most attracted 
Florentino Ariza’s attention in that intriguing speech was the possibility of reviving the 
Poetic Festival, the most renowned and long-lasting of the enterprises that Dr. Juvenal 
Urbino had conceived in the past. He had to bite his tongue to keep from telling him that 
he had been an assiduous participant in the annual competition that had eventually 
interested famous poets, not only in the rest of the country but in other nations of the 
Caribbean as well. 

No sooner had the conversation begun than the hot, steamy air suddenly cooled and a 
storm of crosswinds shook doors and windows with great blasts, while the office groaned 
down to its foundations like a sailing ship set adrift. Dr. Juvenal Urbino did not seem to 
notice. He made some casual reference to the lunatic cyclones of June and then, out of the 
blue, he began to speak of his wife. He considered her not only his most enthusiastic 


collaborator, but the very soul of his endeavors. He said: “Without her I would be 
nothing.” Florentino Ariza listened to him, impassive, nodding his agreement with a 
slight motion of his head, not daring to say anything for fear his voice would betray him. 
Two or three sentences more, however, were enough for him to understand that Dr. 
Juvenal Urbino, in the midst of so many absorbing commitments, still had more than 
enough time to adore his wife almost as much as he did, and that truth stunned him. But 
he could not respond as he would have liked, because then his heart played one of those 
whorish tricks that only hearts can play: it revealed to him that he and this man, whom he 
had always considered his personal enemy, were victims of the same fate and shared the 
hazards of a common passion; they were two animals yoked together. For the first time in 
the interminable twenty-seven years that he had been waiting, Florentino Ariza could not 
endure the pangs of grief at the thought that this admirable man would have to die in 
order for him to be happy. 

The cyclone passed by at last, but in fifteen minutes its gusting northwest winds had 
devastated the neighborhoods by the swamps and caused severe damage in half the city. 
Dr. Juvenal Urbino, gratified once again by the generosity of Uncle Leo XII, did not wait 
for the weather to clear, and without thinking he accepted the umbrella that Florentino 
Ariza lent him for walking to his carriage. But he did not mind. On the contrary: he was 
happy thinking about what Fermina Daza would think when she learned who the owner 
of the umbrella was. He was still troubled by the unsettling interview when Leona 
Cassiani came into his office, and this seemed to him a unique opportunity to stop beating 
about the bush and to reveal his secret, as if he were squeezing a boil that would not leave 
him in peace: it was now or never. He began by asking her what she thought of Dr. 
Juvenal Urbino. She answered almost without thinking: “He is a man who does many 
things, too many perhaps, but I believe that no one knows what he thinks.” Then she 
reflected, shredding the eraser on a pencil with her long, sharp, black woman’s teeth, and 
at last she shrugged her shoulders to put an end to a matter that did not concern her. 

“That may be the reason he does so many things,” she said, “so that he will not have to 
think.” 

Florentino Ariza tried to keep her with him. 

“What hurts me is that he has to die,” he said. 

“Everybody has to die,” she said. 

“Yes,” he said, “but he more than anyone else.” 

She understood none of it: she shrugged her shoulders again without speaking and left. 
Then Florentino Ariza knew that some night, sometime in the future, in a joyous bed with 
Fermina Daza, he was going to tell her that he had not revealed the secret of his love, not 
even to the one person who had earned the right to know it. No: he would never reveal it, 
not even to Leona Cassiani, not because he did not want to open the chest where he had 
kept it so carefully hidden for half his life, but because he realized only then that he had 
lost the key. 

That, however, was not the most staggering event of the afternoon. He still had the 
nostalgic memory of his youth, his vivid recollection of the Poetic Festival, whose 
thunder sounded throughout the Antilles every April 15. He was always one of the 
protagonists, but always, as in almost everything he did, a secret protagonist. He had 
participated several times since the inaugural competition, and he had never received 
even honorable mention. But that did not matter to him, for he did compete not out of 


ambition for the prize but because the contest held an additional attraction for him: in the 
first session Fermina Daza had opened the sealed envelopes and announced the names of 
the winners, and then it was established that she would continue to do so in the years that 
followed. 

Hidden in the darkness of an orchestra seat, a fresh camellia in the buttonhole of his 
lapel throbbing with the strength of his desire, Florentino Ariza saw Fermina Daza open 
the three sealed envelopes on the stage of the old National Theater on the night of the 
first Festival. He asked himself what was going to happen in her heart when she 
discovered that he was the winner of the Golden Orchid. He was certain she would 
recognize his handwriting, and that then she would evoke the afternoons of embroidery 
under the almond trees in the little park, the scent of faded gardenias in his letters, the 
private Waltz of the Crowned Goddess at windblown daybreak. It did not happen. Even 
worse, the Golden Orchid, the most sought-after prize among the nation’s poets, was 
awarded to a Chinese immigrant. The public scandal provoked by that unheard-of 
decision threw doubts on the seriousness of the competition. But the decision was correct, 
and the unanimity of the judges had its justification in the excellence of the sonnet. 

No one believed that the author was the Chinese who received the prize. At the end of 
the last century, fleeing the scourge of yellow fever that devastated Panama during the 
constructio n of the railroad between the two oceans, he had arrived along with many 
others who stayed here until they died, living in Chinese, reproducing in Chinese, and 
looking so much alike that no one could tell one from the other. At first there were no 
more than ten, some of them with their wives and children and edible dogs, but in a few 
years four narrow streets in the slums along the port were overflowing with other, 
unexpected Chinese, who came into the country without leaving a trace in the customs 
records. Some of the young ones turned into venerable patriarchs with so much haste that 
no one could explain how they had time to grow old. In the popular view they were 
divided into two kinds: bad Chinese and good Chinese. The bad ones were those in the 
lugubrious restaurants along the waterfront, where one was as likely to eat like a king as 
to die a sudden death at the table, sitting before a plate of rat meat with sunflowers, and 
which were thought to be nothing more than fronts for white slavery and many other 
kinds of traffic. The good ones were the Chinese in the laundries, heirs of a sacred 
knowledge, who returned one’s shirts cleaner than new, with collars and cuffs like 
recently ironed Communion wafers. The man who defeated seventy-two well-prepared 
rivals in the Poetic Festival was one of these good Chinese. 

When a bewildered Fermina Daza read out the name, no one understood it, not only 
because it was an unusual name but because no one knew for certain what Chinese were 
called. But it was not necessary to think about it very much, because the victorious 
Chinese walked from the back of the theater with that celestial smile Chinese wear when 
they come home early. He had been so sure of victory that he had put on a yellow silk 
robe, appropriate to the rites of spring, in order to accept the prize. He received the 
eighteen-carat Golden Orchid and kissed it with joy in the midst of the thundering jeers 
of the incredulous. He did not react. He waited in the middle of the stage, as 
imperturbable as the apostle of a Divine Providence less dramatic than ours, and as soon 
as it was quiet he read the winning poem. No one understood him. But when the new 
round of jeers and whistles was over, an impassive Fermina Daza read it again, in her 
hoarse, suggestive voice, and amazement reigned after the first line. It was a perfect 


sonnet in the purest Parnassian tradition, and through it there wafted a breath of 
inspiration that revealed the involvement of a master hand. The only possible explanation 
was that one of the great poets had devised the joke in order to ridicule the Poetic Festival, 
and that the Chinese had been a party to it and was determined to keep the secret 
until the day he died. The Commercial Daily, our traditional newspaper, tried to save our 
civic honor with an erudite and rather confused essay concerning the antiquity and 
cultural influence of the Chinese in the Caribbean, and the right they had earned to 
participate in Poetic Festivals. The author of the essay did not doubt that the writer of the 
sonnet was in fact who he said he was, and he defended him in a straightforward manner, 
beginning with the title itself: “All Chinese Are Poets.” The instigators of the plot, if 
there was one, rotted in their graves along with the secret. For his part, the Chinese who 
had won died without confession at an Oriental age and was buried with the Golden 
Orchid in his coffin, but also with the bitterness of never having achieved the only thing 
he wanted in his life, which was recognition as a poet. On his death, the press recalled the 
forgotten incident of the Poetic Festival and reprinted the sonnet with a Modernist 
vignette of fleshy maidens and gold cornucopias, and the guardian angels of poetry took 
advantage of the opportunity to clarify matters: the sonnet seemed so bad to the younger 
generation that no one could doubt any longer that it had, in fact, been composed by the 
dead Chinese. 

Florentino Ariza always associated that scandalous event with the memory of an 
opulent stranger who sat beside him. He had noticed her at the beginning of the 
ceremony, but then he had forgotten her in the frightful suspense of anticipation. She 
attracted his attention because of her mother-of-pearl whiteness, her happy plump 
woman’s scent, her immense soprano’s bosom crowned by an artificial magnolia. She 
wore a very close-fitting black velvet dress, as black as her eager warm eyes, and her 
hair, caught at the nape of her neck with a gypsy comb, was blacker still. She wore 
pendant earrings, a matching necklace, and identical rings, shaped like sparkling roses, on 
several fingers. A beauty mark had been drawn with pencil on her right cheek. In the din 
of the final applause, she looked at Florentino Ariza with sincere grief. 

“Believe me, my heart goes out to you,” she said to him. 

Florentino Ariza was amazed, not because of the condolences, which he in fact 
deserved, but because of his overwhelming astonishment that anyone knew his secret. 
She explained: “I knew because of how the flower trembled in your lapel as they opened 
the envelopes.” She showed him the velvet magnolia in her hand, and she opened her 
heart to him. 

“That is why I took off mine,” she said. 

She was on the verge of tears because of his defeat, but Florentino Ariza raised her 
spirits with his instincts of a nocturnal hunter. 

“Let us go someplace where we can cry together,” he said. 

He accompanied her to her house. At the door, since it was almost midnight and there 
was no one on the street, he persuaded her to invite him in for a brandy while they looked 
at the scrapbooks and photograph albums, containing over ten years of public events, 
which she had told him she owned. It was an old trick even then, but this time it was 
guileless, because she was the one who had talked about her albums as they walked from 
the National Theater. They went in. The first thing Florentino Ariza observed in the 
living room was that the door to the only bedroom was open, and that the bed was huge 


and luxurious with a brocaded quilt and a headboard with brass foliage. That disturbed 
him. She must have realized it, for she crossed the living room and closed the bedroom 
door. Then she invited him to sit down on a flowered cretonne sofa where a sleeping cat 
was lying, and she placed her collection of albums on the coffee table. Florentino Ariza 
began to leaf through them in an unhurried way, thinking more about his next step than 
about what he was seeing, and then he looked up and saw that her eyes were full of tears. 
He advised her to cry to her heart’s content, and to feel no shame, for there was no 
greater relief than weeping, but he suggested that she loosen her bodice first. He hurried 
to help her, because her bodice was tightly fastened in the back with a long closure of 
crossed laces. He did not have to unlace them all, for the bodice burst open from sheer 
internal pressure, and her astronomical bosom was able to breathe freely. 

Florentino Ariza, who had never lost the timidity of a novice even in comfortable 
circumstances, risked a superficial caress on her neck with the tips of his fingers, and she 
writhed and moaned like a spoiled child and did not stop crying. Then he kissed her on 
the same spot, just as softly, and he could not kiss her a second time because she turned 
toward him with all her monumental body, eager and warm, and they rolled in an 
embrace on the floor. The cat on the sofa awoke with a screech and jumped on top of 
them. They groped like desperate virgins and found each other any way they could, 
wallowing in the torn albums, fully dressed, soaked with sweat, and more concerned with 
avoiding the furious claws of the cat than with the disastrous love they were making. But 
beginning the following night, their scratches still bleeding, they continued to make love 
for several years. 

When he realized that he had begun to love her, she was in the fullness of her years, 
and he was approaching his thirtieth birthday. Her name was Sara Noriega, and she had 
enjoyed fifteen minutes of fame in her youth when she won a competition with a 
collection of poems about love among the poor, a book that was never published. She 
was a teacher of deportment and civics in the public schools, and she lived on her salary 
in a rented flat in the motley Sweethearts’ Mews in the old Gethsemane District. She had 
had several occasional lovers, but none with intentions of matrimony, because it was 
difficult for a man of her time and place to marry a woman he had taken to bed. Nor did 
she cherish that dream again after her first formal fiancé, whom she loved with the almost 
demented passion of which one is capable at the age of eighteen, broke the engagement 
one week before the date they had set for the wedding, and left her to wander the limbo 
of abandoned brides. Or of used goods, as they used to say in those days. And yet that 
first experience, although cruel and short-lived, did not leave her bitter; rather, she had 
the overwhelming conviction that with or without marriage, or God, or the law, life was 
not worth living without a man in her bed. What Florentino Ariza liked best about her 
was that in order to reach the heights of glory, she had to suck on an infant’s pacifier 
while they made love. Eventually they had a string of them, in every size, shape, and 
color they could find in the market, and Sara Noriega hung them on the headboard so she 
could reach them without looking in her moments of extreme urgency. 

Although she was as free as he was, and perhaps would not have been opposed to 
making their relationship public, from the very first Florentino Ariza considered it a 
clandestine adventure. He would slip in by the back door, almost always very late at 
night, and sneak away on tiptoe just before dawn. He knew as well as she that in a 
crowded and subdivided building like hers the neighbors had to know more than they 


pretended. But although it was a mere formality, that was how Florentino Ariza was, how 
he would be with all women for the rest of his life. He never made a slip, with her or with 
any other woman; he never betrayed their confidence. He did not exaggerate: on only one 
occasion did he leave a compromising trace or written evidence, and this might have cost 
him his life. In truth, he always behaved as if he were the eternal husband of Fermina 
Daza, an unfaithful husband but a tenacious one, who fought endlessly to free himself 
from his servitude without causing her the displeasure of a betrayal. 

Such secretiveness could not flourish without misapprehensions. Tránsito Ariza died in 
the conviction that the son she had conceived in love and raised for love was immune to 
any kind of love because of his first youthful misfortune. But many less benevolent 
people who were very close to him, who were familiar with his mysterious character and 
his fondness for mystic ceremonies and strange lotions, shared the suspicion that he was 
immune not to love but only to women. Florentino Ariza knew it and never did anything 
to disprove it. It did not worry Sara Noriega either. Like the countless other women who 
loved him, and even those who gave and received pleasure without loving him, she 
accepted him for what he really was: a man passing through. 

He eventually showed up at her house at any hour, above all on Sunday mornings, the 
most peaceful time. She would leave whatever she was doing, no matter what it was, and 
devote her entire body to trying to make him happy in the enormous mythic bed that was 
always ready for him, and in which she never permitted the invocation of liturgical 
formalisms. Florentino Ariza did not understand how a single woman without a past 
could be so wise in the ways of men, or how she could move her sweet porpoise body 
with as much lightness and tenderness as if she were moving under water. She would 
defend herself, saying that love, no matter what else it might be, was a natural talent. She 
would say: “You are either born knowing how, or you never know.” Florentino Ariza 
writhed with retrogressive jealousy, thinking that perhaps she had more of a past than she 
pretended, but he had to swallow everything she said because he told her, as he told them 
all, that she had been his only lover. Among many other things that he did not like, he 
had to resign himself to having the furious cat in bed with them, although Sara Noriega 
had his claws removed so he would not tear them apart while they made love. 

However, almost as much as rolling in bed until they were exhausted, she liked to 
devote the aftermath of love to the cult of poetry. She had an astonishing memory for the 
sentimental verses of her own time, which were sold in the street in pamphlet form for 
two centavos as soon as they were written, and she also pinned on the walls the poems 
she liked most, so that she could read them aloud whenever she wished. She had written 
versions of the deportment and civics texts in hendecasyllabic couplets, like those used 
for spelling, but she could not obtain official approval for them. Her declamatory passion 
was such that at times she continued to shout her recitation as they made love, and 
Florentino Ariza had to force a pacifier into her mouth, as one did with children to make 
them stop crying. 

In the plenitude of their relationship, Florentino Ariza had asked himself which of the 
two was love: the turbulent bed or the peaceful Sunday afternoons, and Sara Noriega 
calmed him with the simple argument that love was everything they did naked. She said: 
“Spiritual love from the waist up and physical love from the waist down.” Sara Noriega 
thought this definition would be good for a poem about divided love, which they wrote 
together and which she submitted to the Fifth Poetic Festival, convinced that no 


participant had ever presented such an original poem. But she lost again. 

She was in a rage as Florentino Ariza accompanied her to her house. For some reason 
she could not explain, she was convinced that Fermina Daza had plotted against her so 
that her poem would not win first prize. Florentino Ariza paid no attention to her. He had 
been in a somber mood ever since the awarding of the prizes, for he had not seen Fermina 
Daza in a long time, and that night he had the impression that she had undergone a 
profound change: for the first time one could tell just by looking at her that she was a 
mother. This came as no surprise to him, for he knew that her son was already in school. 
However, her maternal age had never seemed so apparent to him as it did that night, as 
much for the size of her waist and the slight shortness of breath when she walked as for 
the break in her voice when she read the list of prizewinners. 

In an attempt to document his memories, he leafed through the albums of the Poetic 
Festivals while Sara Noriega prepared something to eat. He saw magazine photographs in 
color, yellowing postcards of the sort sold in arcades for souvenirs, and it was a kind of 
ghostly review of the fallacy of his own life. Until that time he had maintained the fiction 
that it was the world that was changing, and its customs and styles: everything but her. 
But that night he saw for the first time in a conscious way how Fermina Daza’s life was 
passing, and how his was passing, while he did nothing more than wait. He had never 
spoken about her to anyone, because he knew he was incapable or saying her name 
without everyone’s noticing the pallor of his lips. But that night, as he looked through the 
albums as he had done on so many other evenings of Sunday tedium, Sara Noriega made 
one of those casual observations that freeze the blood. 

“She’s a whore,” she said. 

She said it as she walked past him and saw a print of Fermina Daza disguised as a 
black panther at a masquerade ball, and she did not have to mention anyone by name for 
Florentino Ariza to know whom she was talking about. Fearing a revelation that would 
shake his very life, he hurried to a cautious defense. He objected that he knew Fermina 
Daza only from a distance, that they had never gone further than formal greetings, that he 
had no information about her private life, but was certain she was an admirable woman 
who had come out of nowhere and risen to the top by virtue of her own merits. 

“By virtue of marrying a man she does not love for money,” interrupted Sara Noriega. 
“That’s the lowest kind of whore.” His mother had told Florentino Ariza the same thing, 
with less crudeness but with the same moral rigidity, when she tried to console him for 
his misfortunes. Shaken to the very core, he could find no appropriate response to Sara 
Noriega’s harshness, and he attempted to change the subject. But Sara Noriega would not 
allow that to happen until she had given vent to her feelings. In a flash of inspiration that 
she could not have explained, she was convinced that Fermina Daza had been the one 
behind the conspiracy to cheat her of the prize. There was no reason to think so: they did 
not know each other, they had never met, and Fermina Daza had nothing to do with the 
decision of the judges even though she was privy to their secrets. Sara Noriega said in a 
categorical manner: “We women intuit these things.” And that ended the discussion. 

From that moment on, Florentino Ariza began to see her with different eyes. The years 
were passing for her too. Her abundant sexuality was withering without glory, her 
lovemaking was slowed by her sobbing, and her eyelids were beginning to darken with 
old bitterness. She was yesterday’s flower. Besides, in her fury at the defeat, she had lost 
count of her brandies. It was not her night: while they were eating their reheated coconut 


rice, she tried to establish how much each of them had contributed to the losing poem, in 
order to determine how many petals of the Golden Orchid would have gone to each one. 
This was not the first time they had amused themselves with Byzantine competitions, but 
he took advantage of the opportunity to speak through his own newly opened wound, and 
they became entangled in a mean-spirited argument that stirred up in both of them the 
rancor of almost five years of divided love. 

At ten minutes before twelve, Sara Noriega climbed up on a chair to wind the 
pendulum clock, and she reset it on the hour, perhaps trying to tell him without saying so 
that it was time to leave. Then Florentino Ariza felt an urgent need to put a definitive end 
to that loveless relationship, and he looked for the opportunity to be the one to take the 
initiative: as he would always do. Praying that Sara Noriega would let him into her bed so 
that he could tell her no, that everything was over, he asked her to sit next to him when 
she finished winding the clock. But she preferred to keep her distance in the visitor’s easy 
chair. Then Florentino Ariza extended his index finger, wet with brandy, so that she 
could suck it, as she had liked to do in the past during their preambles to love. She 
refused. 

“Not now,” she said. “I’m expecting someone.” 

Ever since his rejection by Fermina Daza, Florentino Ariza had learned to always keep 
the final decision for himself. In less bitter circumstances he would have persisted in his 
pursuit of Sara Noriega, certain of ending the evening rolling in bed with her, for he was 
convinced that once a woman goes to bed with a man, she will continue to go to bed with 
him whenever he desires, as long as he knows how to move her to passion each time. He 
had endured everything because of that conviction, he had overlooked everything, even 
the dirtiest dealings in love, so that he would not have to grant to any woman born of 
woman the opportunity to make the final decision. But that night he felt so humiliated 
that he gulped down the brandy in a single swallow, doing all he could to display anger, 
and left without saying goodbye. They never saw each other again. 

The relationship with Sara Noriega was one of Florentino Ariza’s longest and most 
stable affairs, although it was not his only one dur ing those five years. When he realized 
that he felt happy with her, above all in bed, but that she would never replace Fermina 
Daza, he had another outbreak of his nights as a solitary hunter, and he arranged matters 
so that he could portion out his time and strength as far as they would go. Sara Noriega, 
however, achieved the miracle of curing him for a time. At least now he could live 
without seeing Fermina Daza, instead of interrupting whatever he was doing at any hour 
of the day to search for her along the uncertain pathways of his presentiments, on the 
most unlikely streets, in unreal places where she could not possibly be, wandering 
without reason, with a longing in his breast that gave him no rest until he saw her, even 
for an instant. The break with Sara Noriega, however, revived his dormant grief, and once 
again he felt as he did on those afternoons of endless reading in the little park, but this 
time it was exacerbated by his urgent need for Dr. Juvenal Urbino to die. 

He had known for a long time that he was predestined to make a widow happy, and 
that she would make him happy, and that did not worry him. On the contrary: he was 
prepared. After having known so many of them during his incursions as a solitary hunter, 
Florentino Ariza had come to realize that the world was full of happy widows. He had 
seen them go mad with grief at the sight of their husband’s corpse, pleading to be buried 
alive in the same coffin so they would not have to face the future without him, but as they 


grew reconciled to the reality of their new condition he had seen them rise up from the 
ashes with renewed vitality. They began by living like parasites of gloom in their big 
empty houses, they became the confidantes of their servants, lovers of their pillows, with 
nothing to do after so many years of sterile captivity. They wasted their overabundant 
hours doing what they had not had time for before, sewing the buttons on the dead man’s 
clothes, ironing and reironing the shirts with stiff collar and cuffs so that they would 
always be in perfect condition. They continued to put his soap in the bathroom, his 
monogrammed pillowcase on the bed; his place was always set at the table, in case he 
returned from the dead without warning, as he tended to do in life. But in those solitary 
Masses they began to be aware that once again they were mistresses of their fate, after 
having renounced not only their family name but their own identity in exchange for a 
security that was no more than another of a bride’s many illusions. They alone knew how 
tiresome was the man they loved to distraction, who perhaps loved them but whom they 
had to continue nurturing until his last breath as if he were a child, suckling him, 
changing his soiled diapers, distracting him with a mother’s tricks to ease his terror at 
going out each morning to face reality. And nevertheless, when they watched him leave 
the house, this man they themselves had urged to conquer the world, then they were the 
ones left with the terror that he would never return. That was their life. Love, if it existed, 
was something separate: another life. 

In the restorative idleness of solitude, on the other hand, the widows discovered that 
the honorable way to live was at the body’s bidding, eating only when one was hungry, 
loving without lies, sleeping without having to feign sleep in order to escape the indecency 
of official love, possessed at last of the right to an entire bed to themselves, where 
no one fought them for half of the sheet, half of the air they breathed, half of their night, 
until their bodies were satisfied with dreaming their own dreams, and they woke alone. In 
the dawns of his furtive hunting, Florentino Ariza would see them coming out of five 
o’clock Mass, shrouded in black and with the raven of destiny on their shoulder. As soon 
as they spotted him in the light of dawn, they would cross the street to walk on the other 
side with their small, hesitant steps, the steps of a little bird, for just walking near a man 
might stain their honor. And yet he was convinced that a disconsolate widow, more than 
any other woman, might carry within her the seed of happiness. 

So many widows in his life, since the Widow Nazaret, had made it possible for him to 
discern how happy they were after the death of their husbands. What had been only a 
dream until then was changed, thanks to them, into a possibility that he could seize with 
both hands. He saw no reason why Fermina Daza should not be a widow like them, 
prepared by life to accept him just as he was, without fantasies of guilt because of her 
dead husband, resolved to dis cover with him the other happiness of being happy twice, 
with one love for everyday use which would become, more and more, a miracle of being 
alive, and the other love that belonged to her alone, the love immunized by death against 
all contagion. 

Perhaps he would not have been as enthusiastic if he had even suspected how far 
Fermina Daza was from those illusory calculations, at a time when she was just 
beginning to perceive the horizon of a world in which everything was foreseen except 
adversity. In those days, being rich had many advantages, and many disadvantages as 
well, of course, but half the world longed for it as the most probable way to live forever. 
Fermina Daza had rejected Florentino Ariza in a lightning flash of maturity which she 


paid for immediately with a crisis of pity, but she never doubted that her decision had 
been correct. At the time she could not explain what hidden impulses of her reason had 
allowed her that clairvoyance, but many years later, on the eve of old age, she uncovered 
them suddenly and without knowing how during a casual conversation about Florentino 
Ariza. Everyone knew that he was heir apparent to the River Company of the Caribbean 
during its greatest period; they were all sure they had seen him many times, and had even 
had dealings with him, but no one could remember what he was like. It was then that 
Fermina Daza experienced the revelation of the unconscious motives that had kept her 
from loving him. She said: “It is as if he were not a person but only a shadow.” That is 
what he was: the shadow of someone whom no one had ever known. But while she 
resisted the siege of Dr. Juvenal Urbino, who was just the opposite, she felt herself 
tormented by the phantom of guilt: the only emotion she could not bear. When she felt it 
coming on, a kind of panic overtook her which she could control only if she found 
someone to soothe her conscience. Ever since she was a little girl, when a plate broke in 
the kitchen, when someone fell, when she herself caught her finger in the door, she would 
turn in dismay to the nearest adult and make her accusation: “It was your fault.” Although 
in reality she was not concerned with who was responsible or with convincing herself of 
her own innocence: she was satisfied at having established it. 

The specter was so notorious that Dr. Urbino realized how much it threatened the 
harmony of his home, and as soon as he detected it he hastened to tell his wife: “Don’t 
worry, my love, it was my fault.” For he feared nothing so much as his wife’s sudden 
categorical decisions, and he was convinced that they always originated in a feeling of 
guilt. The confusion caused by her rejection of Florentino Ariza, however, had not been 
resolved with comforting words. For several months Fermina Daza continued to open up 
the balcony in the morning, and she always missed the solitary phantom watching her 
from the deserted little park; she saw the tree that had been his, the most obscure bench 
where he would sit to read as he thought about her, suffered for her, and she would have 
to close the window again, sighing: “Poor man.” When it was already too late to make up 
for the past, she even suffered the disillusionment of knowing that he was not as 
tenacious as she had supposed, and from time to time she would still feel a belated 
longing for a letter that never arrived. But when she had to face the decision of marrying 
Juvenal Urbino, she succumbed, in a major crisis, when she realized that she had no valid 
reasons for preferring him after she had rejected Florentino Ariza without valid reasons. 
In fact, she loved him as little as she had loved the other one, but knew much less about 
him, and his letters did not have the fervor of the other one’s, nor had he given her so 
many moving proofs of his determination. The truth is that Juvenal Urbino’s suit had 
never been undertaken in the name of love, and it was curious, to say the least, that a 
militant Catholic like him would offer her only worldly goods: security, order, happiness, 
contiguous numbers that, once they were added together, might resemble love, almost be 
love. But they were not love, and these doubts increased her confusion, because she was 
also not convinced that love was really what she most needed to live. 

In any case, the principal factor operating against Dr. Juvenal Urbino was his more 
than suspect resemblance to the ideal man that Lorenzo Daza had so wanted for his 
daughter. It was impossible not to see him as the creature of a paternal plot, even if in 
reality he was not, but Fermina Daza became convinced that he was from the time she 
saw him come to her house for a second, unsolicited medical call. In the end, her 


conversations with Cousin Hildebranda only confused her. Because of Cousin 
Hildebranda’s own situation as a victim, she tended to identify with Florentino Ariza, 
forgetting that perhaps Lorenzo Daza had arranged her visit so that she could use her 
influence in favor of Dr. Urbino. God alone knows what it cost Fermina Daza not to 
accompany her cousin when she went to meet Florentino Ariza in the telegraph office. 
She would have liked to see him again to present him with her doubts, to speak with him 
alone, to learn to kno w him well so that she could be certain that her impulsive decision 
would not precipitate her into another, more serious one: capitulation in her personal war 
against her father. But that is what she did at a crucial moment in her life, giving no 
importance whatsoever to the handsomeness of her suitor, or his legendary wealth, or his 
youthful glory, or any of his numerous virtues; rather, she was stunned by the fear of an 
opportunity slipping away, and by the imminence of her twenty-first birthday, which was 
her private time limit for surrendering to fate. That one moment was enough for her to 
make the decision that was foreseen in the laws of God and man: until death do you part. 
Then all her doubts vanished, and she could accomplish without remorse what reason 
indicated as the most decent thing to do: with no tears, she wiped away the memory of 
Florentino Ariza, she erased him completely, and in the space that he had occupied in her 
memory she allowed a field of poppies to bloom. All that she permitted herself was one 
final sigh that was deeper than usual: “Poor man!” 

The most fearful doubts began, however, when she returned from her honeymoon. As 
soon as they opened the trunks, unpacked the furniture, and emptied the eleven chests she 
had brought in order to take possession as lady and mistress of the former palace of the 
Marquis de Casalduero, she realized with mortal vertigo that she was a prisoner in the 
wrong house and, even worse, with a man who was not. It took her six years to leave, the 
worst years of her life, when she was in despair because of the bitterness of Doña Blanca, 
her mother-in-law, and the mental lethargy of her sisters-in-law, who did not go to rot in 
a convent cell only because they already carried one inside themselves. 

Dr. Urbino, resigned to paying homage to his lineage, turned a deaf ear to her pleas, 
confident that the wisdom of God and his wife’s infinite capacity to adapt would resolve 
the situation. He was pained by the deterioration of his mother, whose joy in living had, 
at one time, sparked the desire to live in even the most skeptical. It was true: that 
beautiful, intelligent woman, with a human sensibility not at all common in her milieu, 
had been the soul and body of her social paradise for almost forty years. Widowhood had 
so embittered her that she did not seem the same person; it had made her flabby and sour 
and the enemy of the world. The only possible explanation for her decline was the rancor 
she felt because her husband had knowingly sacrificed himself for a black rabble, as she 
used to say, when the only fitting sacrifice would have been to survive for her sake. In 
any case, Fermina Daza’s happy marriage lasted as long as the honeymoon, and the only 
person who could help her to prevent its final wreckage was paralyzed by terror in the 
presence of his mother’s power. It was he, and not her imbecilic sisters-in-law and her 
half-mad mother-in-law, whom Fermina Daza blamed for the death trap that held her. 
She suspected too late that behind his professional authority and worldly charm, the man 
she had married was a hopeless weakling: a poor devil made bold by the social weight of 
his family names. 

She took refuge in her newborn son. She had felt him leave her body with a sensation 
of relief at freeing herself from something that did not belong to her, and she had been 


horrified at herself when she confirmed that she did not feel the slightest affection for that 
calf from her womb the midwife showed her in the raw, smeared with grease and blood 
and with the umbilical cord rolled around his neck. But in her loneliness in the palace she 
learned to know him, they learned to know each other, and she discovered with great 
delight that one does not love one’s children just because they are one’s children but 
because of the friendship formed while raising them. She came to despise anything and 
anyone who was not him in the house of her misfortune. She was depressed by the 
solitude, the cemetery garden, the squandering of time in the enormous, windowless 
rooms. During the endless nights she felt herself losing her mind, as the madwomen 
screamed in the asylum next door. She was ashamed of their custom of setting the 
banquet table every day with embroidered tablecloths, silver service, and funereal 
candelabra so that five phantoms could dine on café con leche and crullers. She detested 
the rosary at dusk, the affected table etiquette, the constant criticism of the way she held 
her silverware, the way she walked in mystical strides like a woman of the streets, the 
way she dressed as if she were in the circus, and even the rustic way she treated her 
husband and nursed her child without covering her breast with her mantilla. When she 
issued her first invitations to five o’clock tea, with little imperial cakes and candied 
flowers, in accordance with recent English fashion, Doña Blanca objected to serving 
remedies for sweating out a fever in her house instead of chocolate with aged cheese and 
rounded loaves of cassava bread. Not even dreams escaped her notice. One morning 
when Fermina Daza said she had dreamed about a naked stranger who walked through 
the salons of the palace scattering fistfuls of ashes, Doña Blanca cut her off: 

“A decent woman cannot have that kind of dream.” 

Along with the feeling of always being in someone else’s house came two even greater 
misfortunes. One was the almost daily diet of eggplant in all its forms, which Doña 
Blanca refused to vary out of respect for her dead husband, and which Fermina Daza 
refused to eat. She had despised eggplants ever since she was a little girl, even before she 
had tasted them, because it always seemed to her that they were the color of poison. Only 
now she had to admit that in this case something had changed for the better in her life, 
because at the age of five she had said the same thing at the table, and her father had 
forced her to eat the entire casserole intended for six people. She thought she was going 
to die, first because she vomited pulverized eggplant and then because of the cupful of 
castor oil she had to take as a cure for the punishment. Both things were confused in her 
memory as a single purgative, as much for the taste as for her terror of the poison, and at 
the abominable lunches in the palace of the Marquis de Casalduero she had to look away 
so as not to repay their kindness with the icy nausea of castor oil. 

The other misfortune was the harp. One day, very conscious of what she meant, Doña 
Blanca had said: “I do not believe in decent women who do not know how to play the 
piano.” It was an order that even her son tried to dispute, for the best years of his 
childhood had been spent in the galley slavery of piano lessons, although as an adult he 
would be grateful for them. He could not imagine his wife, with her character, subjected 
to the same punishment at the age of twenty-five. But the only concession he could wring 
from his mother, with the puerile argument that it was the instrument of the angels, was 
to substitute the harp for the piano. And so it was that they brought a magnificent harp 
from Vienna that seemed to be gold and sounded as if it were, and that was one of the 
most valued heirlooms in the Museum of the City until it and all it contained were 


consumed in flames. Fermina Daza submitted to this deluxe prison sentence in an attempt 
to avoid catastrophe with one final sacrifice. She began to study with a teacher of 
teachers, whom they brought for that purpose from the city of Mompox, and who died 
unexpectedly two weeks later, and she continued for several years with the best musician 
at the seminary, whose gravedigger’s breath distorted her arpeggios. 

She herself was surprised at her obedience. For although she did not admit it in her 
innermost thoughts, or in the silent arguments she had with her husband during the hours 
they had once devoted to love, she had been caught up more quickly than she had 
believed in the tangle of conventions and prejudices of her new world. At first she had a 
ritual phrase that affirmed her freedom of thought: “To hell with a fan when the wind is 
blowing.” But later, jealous of her carefully won privileges, fearful of embarrassment and 
scorn, she demonstrated her willingness to endure even humiliation in the hope that God 
would at last take pity on Doña Blanca, who never tired of begging Him in her prayers to 
send her death. 

Dr. Urbino justified his own weakness with grave arguments, not even asking himself 
if they were in conflict with the Church. He would not admit that the difficulties with his 
wife had their origin in the rarefied air of the house, but blamed them on the very nature 
of matrimony: an absurd invention that could exist only by the infinite grace of God. It 
was against all scientific reason for two people who hardly knew each other, with no ties 
at all between them, with different characters, different upbringings, and even different 
genders, to suddenly find themselves committed to living together, to sleeping in the 
same bed, to sharing two destinies that perhaps were fated to go in opposite directions. 
He would say: “The problem with marriage is that it ends every night after making love, 
and it must be rebuilt every morning before breakfast.” And worst of all was theirs, 
arising out of two opposing classes, in a city that still dreamed of the return of the 
Viceroys. The only possible bond was something as improbable and fickle as love, if 
there was any, and in their case there was none when they married, and when they were 
on the verge of inventing it, fate had done nothing more than confront them with reality. 

That was the condition of their lives during the period of the harp. They had left behind 
the delicious coincidences of her coming in while he was taking a bath, when, despite the 
arguments and the poisonous eggplant, and despite his demented sisters and the mother 
who bore them, he still had enough love to ask her to soap him. She began to do it with 
the crumbs of love that still remained from Europe, and both allowed themselves to be 
betrayed by memories, softening without wanting to, desiring each other without saying 
so, and at last they would die of love on the floor, spattered with fragrant suds, as they 
heard the maids talking about them in the laundry room: “If they don’t have more 
children it’s because they don’t fuck.” From time to time, when they came home from a 
wild fiesta, the nostalgia crouching behind the door would knock them down with one 
blow of its paw, and then there would be a marvelous explosion in which everything was 
the way it used to be and for five minutes they were once again the uninhibited lovers of 
their honeymoon. 

But except for those rare occasions, one of them was always more tired than the other 
when it was time to go to bed. She would dawdle in the bathroom, rolling her cigarettes 
in perfumed paper, smoking alone, relapsing into her consolatory love as she did when 
she was young and free in her own house, mistress of her own body. She always had a 
headache, or it was too hot, always, or she pretended to be asleep, or she had her period 


again, her period, always her period. So much so that Dr. Urbino had dared to say in 
class, only for the relief of unburdening himself without confession, that after ten years of 
marriage women had their periods as often as three times a week. 

Misfortune piled on misfortune, and in the worst of those years Fermina Daza had to 
face what was bound to come sooner or later: the truth of her father’s fabulous and 
always mysterious dealings. The Governor of the Province made an appointment with 
Juvenal Urbino in his office to bring him up to date on the excesses of his father-in-law, 
which he summed up in a single sentence: “There is no law, human or divine, that this 
man has not ignored.” Some of his most serious schemes had been carried out in the 
shadow of his son-in-law’s prestige, and it would have been difficult to believe that he 
and his wife knew nothing about them. Realizing that the only reputation to protect was 
his own, because it was the only one still stand ing, Dr. Juvenal Urbino intervened with all 
the weight of his prestige, and he succeeded in covering up the scandal with his word of 
honor. So that Lorenzo Daza left the country on the first boat, never to return. He went 
back to his native country as if it were one of those little trips one takes from time to time 
to ward off nostalgia, and at the bottom of that appearance there was some truth: for a 
long time he had boarded ships from his country just to drink a glass of water from the 
cisterns filled with the rains of the village where he was born. He left without having his 
arm twisted, protesting his innocence, and still trying to convince his son-in-law that he 
had been the victim of a political conspiracy. He left crying for his girl, as he had called 
Fermina Daza since her marriage, crying for his grandson, for the land in which he had 
become rich and free and where, on the basis of his shady dealings, he had won the 
power to turn his daughter into an exquisite lady. He left old and sick, but still he lived 
much longer than any of his victims might have desired. Fermina Daza could not repress 
a sigh of relief when she received the news of his death, and in order to avoid questions 
she did not wear mourning, but for several months she wept with mute fury without 
knowing why when she locked herself in the bathroom to smoke, and it was because she 
was crying for him. 

The most absurd element in their situation was that they never seemed so happy in 
public as during those years of misery. For this was the time of their greatest victories 
over the subterranean hostility of a milieu that resisted accepting them as they were: 
different and modern, and for that reason transgressors against the traditional order. That, 
however, had been the easy part for Fermina Daza. Life in the world, which had caused 
her so much uncertainty before she was familiar with it, was nothing more than a system 
of atavistic contracts, banal ceremonies, preordained words, with which people entertained 
each other in society in order not to commit murder. The dominant sign in that 
paradise of provincial frivolity was fear of the unknown. She had defined it in a simpler 
way: “The problem in public life is learning to overcome terror; the problem in married 
life is learning to overcome boredom.” She had made this sudden dis covery with the 
clarity of a revelation when, trailing her endless bridal train behind her, she had entered 
the vast salon of the Social Club, where the air was thin with the mingled scent of so 
many flowers, the brilliance of the waltzes, the tumult of perspiring men and tremulous 
women who looked at her not knowing how they were going to exorcise the dazzling 
menace that had come to them from the outside world. She had just turned twenty-one 
and had done little more than leave her house to go to school, but with one look around 
her she understood that her adversaries were not convulsed with hatred but paralyzed by 


fear. Instead of frightening them even more, as she was already doing, she had the 
compassion to help them learn to know her. They were no different from what she 
wanted them to be, just as in the case of cities, which did not seem better or worse to her, 
but only as she made them in her heart. Despite the perpetual rain, the sordid merchants, 
and the Homeric vulgarity of its carriage drivers, she would always remember Paris as 
the most beautiful city in the world, not because of what it was or was not in reality, but 
because it was linked to the memory of her happiest years. Dr. Urbino, for his part, 
commanded respect with the same weapons that were used against him, except that his 
were wielded with more intelligence and with calculated solemnity. Nothing happened 
without them: civic exhibitions, the Poetic Festival, artistic events, charity raffles, 
patriotic ceremonies, the first journey in a balloon. They were there for everything, and 
almost always from its inception and at the forefront. During those unfortunate years no 
one could have imagined anyone happier than they or a marriage more harmonious than 
theirs. 

The house left by her father gave Fermina Daza a refuge from the asphyxiation of the 
family palace. As soon as she could escape from public view, she would go in secret to 
the Park of the Evangels, and there she would visit with new friends and some old ones 
from school or the painting classes: an innocent substitute for infidelity. She spent 
tranquil hours as a single mother, surrounded by what remained of her girlhood 
memories. She replaced the perfumed crows, found cats on the street and placed them in 
the care of Gala Placidia, who by this time was old and somewhat slowed by rheumatism 
but still willing to bring the house back to life. She opened the sewing room where 
Florentino Ariza saw her for the first time, where Dr. Juvenal Urbino had her stick out 
her tongue so that he could try to read her heart, and she turned it into a sanctuary of the 
past. One winter afternoon she went to close the balcony because a heavy storm was 
threatening, and she saw Florentino Ariza on his bench under the almond trees in the little 
park, with his father’s suit altered to fit him and his book open on his lap, but this time 
she did not see him as she had seen him by accident on various occasions, but at the age 
at which he remained in her memory. She was afraid that the vision was an omen of 
death, and she was grief-stricken. She dared to tell herself that perhaps she would have 
been happier with him, alone with him in that house she had restored for him with as 
much love as he had felt when he restored his house for her, and that simple hypothesis 
dismayed her because it permitted her to realize the extreme of unhappiness she had 
reached. Then she summoned her last strength and obliged her husband to talk to her 
without evasion, to confront her, to argue with her, to cry with her in rage at the loss of 
paradise, until they heard the last rooster crow, and the light filtered in through the lace 
curtains of the palace, and the sun rose, and her husband, puffy with so much talk, 
exhausted with lack of sleep, his heart fortified with so much weeping, laced his shoes, 
tightened his belt, fastened everything that remained to him of his manhood, and told her 
yes, my love, they were going to look for the love they had lost in Europe: starting tomorrow 
and forever after. It was such a firm decision that he arranged with the Treasury 
Bank, his general administrator, for the immediate liquidation of the vast family fortune, 
which was dispersed, and had been from the very beginning, in all kinds of businesses, 
investments, and long-term, sacred bonds, and which only he knew was not as excessive 
as legend would have it: just large enough so one did not need to think about it. What 
there was of it was converted into stamped gold, to be invested little by little in his 


foreign bank accounts until he and his wife would own nothing in this harsh country, not 
even a plot of ground to die on. 

And yet Florentino Ariza actually existed, contrary to what she had decided to believe. 
He was on the pier where the French ocean liner was docked when she arrived with her 
husband and child in the landau drawn by the golden horses, and he saw them emerge as 
he had so often seen the m at public ceremonies: perfect. They were leaving with their 
son, raised in such a way that one could already see what he would be like as an adult: 
and so he was. Juvenal Urbino greeted Florentino Ariza with a joyous wave of his hat: 
“We’re off to conquer Flanders.” Fermina Daza nodded, and Florentino Ariza took off 
his hat and made a slight bow, and she looked at him without the slightest compassion for 
the premature ravages of baldness. There he was, just as she saw him: the shadow of 
someone she had never met. 

These were not the best times for Florentino Ariza either. In addition to his work, 
which grew more and more intense, and the tedium of his furtive hunting, and the dead 
calm of the years, there was also the final crisis of Tránsito Ariza, whose mind had been 
left almost without memories, almost a blank, to the point where she would turn to him at 
times, see him reading in the armchair he always sat in, and ask him in surprise: “And 
whose son are you?” He would always reply with the truth, but she would interrupt him 
again without delay: 

“And tell me something, my boy,” she would ask. “Who am I?” 

She had grown so fat that she could not move, and she spent the day in the notions 
shop, where there was no longer anything to sell, primping and dressing in finery from 
the time she awoke with the first roosters until the following dawn, for she slept very 
little. She would put garlands of flowers on her head, paint her lips, powder her face and 
arms, and at last she would ask whoever was with her, “Who am I now?” The neighbors 
knew that she always expected the same reply: “You are Little Roachie Martínez.” This 
identity, stolen from a character in a children’s story, was the only one that satisfied her. 
She continued to rock and to fan herself with long pink feathers, until she began all over 
again: the crown of paper flowers, violet on her eyelids, red on her lips, dead white on her 
face. And again the question to whoever was nearby: “Who am I now?” When she 
became the laughingstock of the neighborhood, Florentino Ariza had the counter and the 
storage drawers of the old notions shop dismantled in one night, and the street door 
sealed, and the space arranged just as he had heard her describe Roachie Martínez’s 
bedroom, and she never asked again who she was. 

At the suggestion of Uncle Leo XII, he found an older woman to take care of her, but 
the poor thing was always more asleep than awake, and at times she gave the impression 
that she, too, forgot who she was. So that Florentino Ariza would stay home from the 
time he left the office until he managed to put his mother to sleep. He no longer played 
dominoes at the Commercial Club, and for a long time he did not visit the few women 
friends he had continued to see, for something very profound had changed in his heart 
after his dreadful meeting with Olimpia Zuleta. 

It was as if he had been struck by lightning. Florentino Ariza had just taken Uncle Leo 
XII home during one of those October storms that would leave us reeling, when he saw 
from his carriage a slight, very agile girl in a dress covered with organza ruffles that 
looked like a bridal gown. He saw her running in alarm from one side of the street to the 
other, because the wind had snatched away her parasol and was blowing it out to sea. He 


rescued her in his carriage and went out of his way to take her to her house, an old 
converted hermitage that faced the open sea and whose patio, visible from the street, was 
full of pigeon coops. On the way, she told him that she had been married less than a year 
to a man who sold trinkets in the market, whom Florentino Ariza had often seen on his 
company’s boats unloading cartons of all kinds of salable merchandise and with a multitude 
of pigeons in a wicker cage of the sort mothers used on riverboats for carrying 
infants. Olimpia Zuleta seemed to belong to the wasp family, not only because of her 
high buttocks and meager bosom, but because of everything about her: her hair like 
copper wire, her freckles, her round, animated eyes that were farther apart than normal, 
and her melodious voice that she used only for saying intelligent and amusing things. 
Florentino Ariza thought she was more witty than attractive, and he forgot her as soon as 
he left her at her house, where she lived with her husband, his father, and other members 
of his family. 

A few days later he saw her husband at the port, loading merchandise instead of 
unloading it, and when the ship weighed anchor Florentino heard, with great clarity, the 
voice of the devil in his ear. That afternoon, after taking Uncle Leo XII home, he passed 
by Olimpia Zuleta’s house as if by accident, and he saw her over the fence, feeding the 
noisy pigeons. He called to her from his carriage: “How much for a pigeon?” She 
recognized him and answered in a merry voice: “They are not for sale.” He asked: “Then 
what must I do to get one?” Still feeding the pigeons, she replied: “You drive her back to 
the coop when you find her lost in a storm.” So that Florentino Ariza arrived home that 
night with a thank-you gift from Olimpia Zuleta: a carrier pigeon with a metal ring 
around its leg. 

The next afternoon, just at dinnertime, the beautiful pigeon fancier saw the gift carrier 
pigeon in the dovecote and thought it had escaped. But when she picked it up to examine 
it, she realized that there was a slip of paper inside the ring: a declaration of love. It was 
the first time that Florentino Ariza had left a written trace, and it would not be the last, 
although on this occasion he had been prudent enough not to sign his name. He was 
going into his house the following afternoon, a Wednesday, when a street boy handed 
him the same pigeon in a cage, with a memorized message that the pigeon lady hereby 
sends you this, and says to tell you to please keep the cage locked because if not it will 
fly away again and this is the last time she will send it back. He had no idea how to 
interpret this: either the pigeon had lost the note en route, or the pigeonkeeper had 
decided to play innocent, or she had returned the pigeon so that he could send it back to 
her again. If that was true, however, the natural thing would have been for her to return 
the pigeon with a reply. 

On Saturday morning, after much thought, Florentino Ariza sent back the pigeon with 
another unsigned letter. This time he did not have to wait until the next day. In the 
afternoon the same boy brought it back in another cage, with a message that said she 
hereby sends back the pigeon that flew away again, and that the day before yesterday she 
returned it out of courtesy and this time she returns it out of pity, but that now it is really 
true that she will not return it again if it flies away another time. Tránsito Ariza played 
with the pigeon until very late, she took it out of the cage, she rocked it in her arms, she 
tried to lull it to sleep with children’s songs, and then suddenly Florentino Ariza realized 
that in the ring around its leg was a little piece of paper with one line written on it: I do 
not accept anonymous letters. Florentino Ariza read it, his heart wild with joy as if this 


were the culmination of his first adventure, and he did not sleep a wink that night as he 
tossed and turned with impatience. Very early the next day, before he left for the office, 
he once again set the pigeon free, carrying a love note that bore his clear signature, and 
he also put in the ring the freshest, reddest, and most fragrant rose from his garden. 

It was not that easy. After three months of pursuit, the beautiful pigeon fancier was still 
sending the same answer: I am not one of those women. But she never refused to accept 
his messages or broke any of the dates that Florentino Ariza arranged so that they would 
seem to be casual encounters. He was a different person: the lover who never showed his 
face, the man most avid for love as well as most niggardly with it, the man who gave 
nothing and wanted everything, the man who did not allow anyone to leave a trace of her 
passing in his heart, the hunter lying in ambush--this man went out on the street in the 
midst of ecstatic signed letters, gallant gifts, imprudent vigils at the pigeonkeeper’s 
house, even on two occasions when her husband was not on a trip or at the market. It was 
the only time, since his youngest days, when he felt himself run through by the lance of 
love. 

Six months after their first meeting, they found themselves at last in a cabin on a 
riverboat that was being painted at the docks. It was a marvelous afternoon. Olimpia 
Zuleta had the joyous love of a startled pigeon fancier, and she preferred to remain naked 
for several hours in a slow-moving repose that was, for her, as loving as love itself. The 
cabin was dismantled, half painted, and they would take the odor of turpentine away with 
them in the memory of a happy afternoon. In a sudden inspiration, Florentino Ariza 
opened a can of red paint that was within reach of the bunk, wet his index finger, and 
painted the pubis of the beautiful pigeon fancier with an arrow of blood pointing south, 
and on her belly the words: This pussy is mine. That same night, Olimpia Zuleta 
undressed in front of her husband, having forgotten what was scrawled there, and he did 
not say a word, his breathing did not even change, nothing, but he went to the bathroom 
for his razor while she was putting on her nightgown, and in a single slash he cut her 
throat. 

Florentino did no t find out until many days later, when the fugitive husband was 
captured and told the newspapers the reasons for the crime and how he had committed it. 
For many years he thought with terror about the signed letters, he kept track of the prison 
term of the murderer, who knew him because of his dealings with the boat company, but 
it was not so much fear of a knife at his throat or a public scandal as the misfortune of 
Fermina Daza’s learning about his infidelity. One day during his years of waiting, the 
woman who took care of Tránsito Ariza had to stay at the market longer than expected 
because of an unseasonable downpour, and when she returned to the house she found her 
sitting in the rocking chair, painted and bedecked as always, and with eyes so animated 
and a smile so mischievous that her caretaker did not realize she was dead until two hours 
later. Shortly before her death she had distributed to the neighborhood children the 
fortune in gold and jewels hidden in the jars buried under her bed, saying they could eat 
them like candy, and some of the most valuable were impossible to recover. Florentino 
Ariza buried her in the former Hand of God ranch, which was still known as the Cholera 
Cemetery, and he planted a rosebush on her grave. 

After his first few visits to the cemetery, Florentino Ariza discovered that Olimpia 
Zuleta was buried very close by, without a tombstone but with her name and the date 
scrawled in the fresh cement of the crypt, and he thought in horror that this was one of 


her husband’s sanguinary jokes. When the roses bloomed he would place a flower on her 
grave if there was no one in sight, and later he planted a cutting taken from his mother’s 
rosebush. Both bloomed in such profusion that Florentino Ariza had to bring shears and 
other garden tools to keep them under control. But the task was beyond him: after a few 
years the two rosebushes had spread like weeds among the graves, and from then on, the 
unadorned cemetery of the plague was called the Cemetery of Roses, until some mayor 
who was less realistic than popular wisdom cleared out the roses one night and hung a 
republican sign from the arch of the entrance gate: Universal Cemetery. 

The death of his mother left Florentino Ariza condemned once again to his maniacal 
pursuits: the office, his meetings in strict rotation with his regular mistresses, the domino 
games at the Commercial Club, the same books of love, the Sunday visits to the 
cemetery. It was the rust of routine, which he had despised and feared so much, but 
which had protected him from an awareness of his age. However, one Sunday in 
December, when the rosebushes on the tombs had already defeated the garden shears, he 
saw the swallows on the recently installed electric wires and he suddenly realized how 
much time had gone by since the death of his mother, and how much since the murder of 
Olimpia Zuleta, and how very much since that other distant December afternoon when 
Fermina Daza sent him a letter saying yes, she would love him always. Until then he had 
behaved as if time would not pass for him but only for others. Just the week before, he 
happened to meet on the street one of the many couples who had married because of the 
letters he had written, and he did not recognize their oldest child, who was his godson. He 
smoothed over his embarrassment with the conventional exclamation: “I’ll be damned, 
he’s a man already!” And he continued in the same way even after his body began 
sending him the first warning signals, because he had always had the iron constitution of 
the sickly. Tránsito Ariza used to say: “The only disease my son ever had was cholera.” 
She had confused cholera with love, of course, long before her memory failed. But in any 
event she was mistaken, because her son had suffered from six blennorrhagias, although 
the doctor had said they were not six but the same one that reappeared after each lost 
battle. He had also had a swollen lymph gland, four warts, and six cases of impetigo in 
the groin, but it would not have occurred to him or any man to think of these as diseases; 
they were only the spoils of war. 

When he had just turned forty, he had gone to the doctor because of vague pains in 
various parts of his body. After many tests, the doctor had said: “It’s age.” He had 
returned home without even wondering if any of that had anything to do with him. For 
his only point of reference in his own past was the ephemeral love affair with Fermina 
Daza, and only what concerned her had anything to do with reckoning his life. So that on 
the afternoon when he saw the swallows on the electric wires, he reviewed the past from 
his earliest memory, he reviewed his chance loves, the countless pitfalls he had been 
obliged to avoid in order to reach a position of authority, the events without number that 
had given rise to his bitter determination that Fermina Daza would be his and he would 
be hers despite everything, in the face of everything, and only then did he realize that his 
life was passing. He was shaken by a visceral shudder that left his mind blank, and he had 
to drop the garden tools and lean against the cemetery wall so that the first blow of old 
age would not knock him down. 

“Damn it,” he said, appalled, “that all happened thirty years ago!” 

And it had. Thirty years that had also gone by for Fermina Daza, of course, but had 


been for her the most pleasant and exhilarating years of her life. The days of horror in the 
Palace of Casalduero were relegated to the trash heap of memory. She was living in her 
new house in La Manga, absolute mistress of her own destiny, with a hus band she would 
have preferred to all the men in the world if she had to choose again, a son who was 
continuing the family tradition in the Medical School, and a daughter so much like her 
when she was her age that at times she was disturbed by the impression of feeling herself 
duplicated. She had returned to Europe three times after the unfortunate trip from which 
she had intended never to return so that she would not have to live in perpetual turmoil. 

God must have finally listened to someone’s prayers: after two years in Paris, when 
Fermina Daza and Juvenal Urbino were just beginning to find what remained of their 
love in the ruins, a midnight telegram awoke them with the news that Doña Blanca de 
Urbino was gravely ill, and almost on its heels came another with the news of her death. 
They returned without delay. Fermina Daza walked off the ship wearing a black tunic 
whose fullness could not hide her condition. In fact she was pregnant again, and this 
news gave rise to a popular song, more mischievous than malicious, whose chorus was 
heard for the rest of the year: What d’you think she does over there, this beauty from our 
earth? Whenever she comes back from Paris, she’s ready to give birth. Despite the 
vulgarity of the words, for many years afterward Dr. Juvenal Urbino would request it at 
Social Club dances to prove he was a good sport. 

The noble palace of the Marquis de Casalduero, whose existence and coat of arms had 
never been documented, was sold to the municipal treasury for a decent price, and then 
resold for a fortune to the central government when a Dutch researcher began excavations 
to prove that the real grave of Christopher Columbus was located there: the fifth one so 
far. The sisters of Dr. Urbino, without taking vows, went to live in seclusion in the 
Convent of the Salesians, and Fermina Daza stayed in her father’s old house until the 
villa in La Manga was completed. She walked in with a firm step, she walked in prepared 
to command, with the English furniture brought back on their honeymoon and the 
complementary furnishings they sent for after their reconciliation trip, and from the first 
day she began to fill it with exotic animals that she herself went to buy on the schooners 
from the Antilles. She walked in with the husband she had won back, the son she had 
raised with propriety, the daughter who was born four months after their return and 
whom they baptized Ofelia. Dr. Urbino, for his part, understood that it was impossible to 
possess his wife as completely as he had on their honeymoon, because the part of love he 
wanted was what she had given, along with her best hours, to her children, but he learned 
to live and be happy with what was left over. The harmony they had longed for reached 
its culmination when they least expected it, at a gala dinner at which a delicious food was 
served that Fermina Daza could not identify. She began with a good portion, but she liked 
it so much that she took another of the same size, and she was lamenting the fact that 
urbane etiquette did not permit her to help herself to a third, when she learned that she 
had just eaten, with unsuspected pleasure, two heaping plates of pureed eggplant. She 
accepted defeat with good grace, and from that time on, eggplant in all its forms was 
served at the villa in La Manga with almost as much frequency as at the Palace of 
Casalduero, and it was enjoyed so much by everyone that Dr. Juvenal Urbino would 
lighten the idle hours of his old age by insisting that he wanted to have another daughter 
so that he could give her the best-loved word in the house as a name: Eggplant Urbino. 

Fermina Daza knew then that private life, unlike public life, was fickle and 


unpredictable. It was not easy for her to establish real differences between children and 
adults, but in the last analysis she preferred children, because their judgment was more 
reliable. She had barely turned the corner into maturity, free at last of illusions, when she 
began to detect the disillusionment of never having been what she had dreamed of being 
when she was young, in the Park of the Evangels. Instead, she was something she never 
dared admit even to herself: a deluxe servant. In society she came to be the woman most 
loved, most catered to, and by the same token most feared, but in nothing was she more 
demanding or less forgiving than in the management of her house. She always felt as if 
her life had been lent to her by her husband: she was absolute monarch of a vast empire 
of happiness, which had been built by him and for him alone. She knew that he loved her 
above all else, more than anyone else in the world, but only for his own sake: she was in 
his holy service. 

If anything vexed her, it was the perpetual chain of daily meals. For they not only had 
to be served on time: they had to be perfect, and they had to be just what he wanted to 
eat, without his having to be asked. If she ever did ask, in one of the innumerable useless 
ceremonies of their domestic ritual, he would not even look up from the newspaper and 
would reply: “Anything.” In his amiable way he was telling the truth, because one could 
not imagine a less despotic husband. But when it was time to eat, it could not be 
anything, but just what he wanted, and with no defects: the meat should not taste of meat, 
and the fish should not taste of fish, and the pork should not taste of mange, and the 
chicken should not taste of feathers. Even when it was not the season for asparagus, it had 
to be found regardless of cost, so that he could take pleasure in the vapors of his own 
fragrant urine. She did not blame him: she blamed life. But he was an implacable 
protagonist in that life. At the mere hint of a doubt, he would push aside his plate and say: 
“This meal has been prepared without love.” In that sphere he would achieve moments of 
fantastic inspiration. Once he tasted some chamomile tea and sent it back, saying only: 
“This stuff tastes of window.” Both she and the servants were surprised because they had 
never heard of anyone who had drunk boiled window, but when they tried the tea in an 
effort to understand, they understood: it did taste of window. 

He was a perfect husband: he never picked up anything from the floor, or turned out a 
light, or closed a door. In the morning darkness, when he found a button missing from his 
clothes, she would hear him say: “A man should have two wives: one to love and one to 
sew on his buttons.” Every day, at his first swallow of coffee and at his first spoonful of 
soup, he would break into a heartrending howl that no longer frightened anyone, and then 
unburden himself: “The day I leave this house, you will know it is because I grew tired of 
always having a burned mouth.” He would say that they never prepared lunches as 
appetizing and unusual as on the days when he could not eat because he had taken a 
laxative, and he was so convinced that this was treachery on the part of his wife that in 
the end he refused to take a purgative unless she took one with him. 

Tired of his lack of understanding, she asked him for an unusual birthday gift: that for 
one day he would take care of the domestic chores. He accepted in amusement, and 
indeed took charge of the house at dawn. He served a splendid breakfast, but he forgot 
that fried eggs did not agree with her and that she did not drink café con leche. Then he 
ordered a birthday luncheon for eight guests and gave instructions for tidying the house, 
and he tried so hard to manage better than she did that before noon he had to capitulate 
without a trace of embarrassment. From the first moment he realized he did not have the 


slightest idea where anything was, above all in the kitchen, and the servants let him upset 
everything to find each item, for they were playing the game too. At ten o’clock no 
decisions had been made regarding lunch because the housecleaning was not finished yet, 
the bedroom was not straightened, the bathroom was not scrubbed; he forgot to replace 
the toilet paper, change the sheets, and send the coachmen for the children, and he 
confused the servants’ duties: he told the cook to make the beds and set the 
chambermaids to cooking. At eleven o’clock, when the guests were about to arrive, the 
chaos in the house was such that Fermina Daza resumed command, laughing out loud, 
not with the triumphant attitude she would have liked but shaken instead with 
compassion for the domestic helplessness of her husband. He was bitter as he offered the 
argument he always used: “Things did not go as badly for me as they would for you if 
you tried to cure the sick.” But it was a useful lesson, and not for him alone. Over the 
years they both reached the same wise conclusion by different paths: it was not possible 
to live together in any other way, or love in any other way, and nothing in this world was 
more difficult than love. 

In the fullness of her new life, Fermina Daza would see Florentino Ariza on various 
public occasions, with more frequency as he improved his position, but she learned to see 
him with so much naturalness that more than once, in sheer distraction, she forgot to 
greet him. She heard about him often, because in the world of business his cautious but 
inexorable advance in the R.C.C. was a constant topic of conversation. She saw him 
improve his manners, his timidity was passed off as a certain enigmatic distance, a slight 
increase in weight suited him, as did the slowness of age, and he had known how to 
handle his absolute baldness with dignity. The only area in which he persisted in defying 
time and fashion was in his somber attire, his anachronistic frock coats, his unique hat, 
the poet’s string ties from his mother’s notions shop, his sinister umbrella. Fermina Daza 
grew accustomed to seeing him with other eyes, and in the end she did not connect him to 
the languid adolescent who would sit and sigh for her under the gusts of yellow leaves in 
the Park of the Evangels. In any case, she never saw him with indifference, and she was 
always pleased by the good news she heard about him, because that helped to alleviate 
her guilt. 

However, when she thought he was completely erased from her memory, he reappeared 
where she least expected him, a phantom of her nostalgia. It was during the first 
glimmering of old age, when she began to feel that something irreparable had occurred in 
her life whenever she heard thunder before the rain. It was the incurable wound of 
solitary, stony, punctual thunder that would sound every afternoon in October at three 
o’clock in the Sierra Villanueva, a memory that was becoming more vivid as the years 
went by. While more recent events blurred in just a few days, the memories of her 
legendary journey through Cousin Hildebranda’s province were as sharp as if they had 
happened yesterday, and they had the perverse clarity of nostalgia. She remembered 
Manaure, in the mountains, its one straight, green street, its birds of good omen, the 
haunted house where she would wake to find her nightgown soaked by the endless tears 
of Petra Morales, who had died of love many years before in the same bed where she lay 
sleeping. She remembered the taste of the guavas, which had never been the same again, 
the warning thunder, which had been so intense that its sound was confused with the 
sound of rain, the topaz afternoons in San Juan del César when she would go walking 
with her court of excited cousins and clench her teeth so that her heart would not leap out 


of her mouth as they approached the telegraph office. She had to sell her father’s house 
because she could not bear the pain of her adolescence, the view of the desolate little park 
from the balcony, the sibylline fragrance of gardenias on hot nights, the frightening face 
of an old lady on the February afternoon when her fate was decided, and regardless of 
where she turned her memory of those times, she would find herself face to face with 
Florentino Ariza. But she always had enough serenity to know that they were not 
memories of love or repentance, but the image of a sorrow that left a trail of tears on her 
cheeks. Without realizing it, she was menaced by the same trap of pity that had been the 
downfall of so many of Florentino Ariza’s defenseless victims. 

She clung to her husband. And it was just at the time when he needed her most, 
because he suffered the disadvantage of being ten years ahead of her as he stumbled 
alone through the mists of old age, with the even greater disadvantage of being a man and 
weaker than she was. In the end they knew each other so well that by the time they had 
been married for thirty years they were like a single divided being, and they felt 
uncomfortable at the frequency with which they guessed each other’s thoughts without 
intending to, or the ridiculous accident of one of them anticipating in public what the 
other was going to say. Together they had overcome the daily incomprehension, the 
instantaneous hatred, the reciprocal nastiness and fabulous flashes of glory in the 
conjugal conspiracy. It was the time when they loved each other best, without hurry or 
excess, when both were most conscious of and grateful for their incredible victories over 
adversity. Life would still present them with other mortal trials, of course, but that no 
longer mattered: they were on the other shore. 


CHAPTER FIVE 

ON THE OCCASION of the celebration of the new century, there was an innovative 
program of public ceremonies, the most memorable of which was the first journey in a 
balloon, the fruit of the boundless initiative of Dr. Juvenal Urbino. Half the city gathered 
on the Arsenal Beach to express their wonderment at the ascent of the enormous balloon 
made of taffeta in the colors of the flag, which carried the first airmail to San Juan de la 
Ciénaga, some thirty leagues to the northeast as the crow flies. Dr. Juvenal Urbino and 
his wife, who had experienced the excitement of flight at the World’s Fair in Paris, were 
the first to climb into the wicker basket, followed by the pilot and six distinguished 
guests. They were carrying a letter from the Governor of the Province to the municipal 
officials of San Juan de la Ciénaga, in which it was documented for all time that this was 
the first mail transported through the air. A journalist from the Commercial Daily asked 
Dr. Juvenal Urbino for his final words in the event he perished during the adventure, and 
he did not even take the time to think about the answer that would earn him so much 
abuse. 

“In my opinion,” he said, “the nineteenth century is passing for everyone except us.” 

Lost in the guileless crowd that sang the national anthem as the balloon gained altitude, 
Florentino Ariza felt himself in agreement with the person whose comments he heard 
over the din, to the effect that this was not a suitable exploit for a woman, least of all one 
as old as Fermina Daza. But it was not so dangerous after all. Or at least not so much 
dangerous as depressing. The balloon reached its destination without incident after a 
peaceful trip through an incredible blue sky. They flew well and very low, with a calm, 
favorable wind, first along the spurs of the snow-covered mountains and then over the 
vastness of the Great Swamp. 

From the sky they could see, just as God saw them, the ruins of the very old and heroic 
city of Cartagena de Indias, the most beautiful in the world, abandoned by its inhabitants 
because of the cholera panic after three centuries of resistance to the sieges of the English 
and the atrocities of the buccaneers. They saw the walls still intact, the brambles in the 
streets, the fortifications devoured by heartsease, the marble palaces and the golden altars 
and the Viceroys rotting with plague inside their armor. 

They flew over the lake dwellings of the Trojas in Cataca, painted in lunatic colors, 
with pens holding iguanas raised for food and balsam apples and crepe myrtle hanging in 
the lacustrine gardens. Excited by everyone’s shouting, hundreds of naked children 
plunged into the water, jumping out of windows, jumping from the roofs of the houses 
and from the canoes that they handled with astonishing skill, and diving like shad to 
recover the bundles of clothing, the bottles of cough syrup, the beneficent food that the 
beautiful lady with the feathered hat threw to them from the basket of the balloon. 

They flew over the dark ocean of the banana plantations, whose silence reached them 
like a lethal vapor, and Fermina Daza remembered herself at the age of three, perhaps 
four, walking through the shadowy forest holding the hand of her mother, who was 
almost a girl herself, surrounded by other women dressed in muslin, just like her mother, 


with white parasols and hats made of gauze. The pilot, who was observing the world 
through a spyglass, said: “They seem dead.” He passed the spyglass to Dr. Juvenal 
Urbino, who saw the oxcarts in the cultivated fields, the boundary lines of the railroad 
tracks, the blighted irrigation ditches, and wherever he looked he saw human bodies. 
Someone said that the cholera was ravaging the villages of the Great Swamp. Dr. Urbino, 
as he spoke, continued to look through the spyglass. 

“Well, it must be a very special form of cholera,” he said, “because every single corpse 
has received the coup de grace through the back of the neck.” 

A short while later they flew over a foaming sea, and they landed without incident on a 
broad, hot beach whose surface, cracked with niter burned like fire. The officials were 
there with no more protection against the sun than ordinary umbrellas, the elementary 
schools were there waving little flags in time to the music, and the beauty queens with 
scorched flowers and crowns made of gold cardboard, and the brass band of the 
prosperous town of Gayra, which in those days was the best along the Caribbean coast. 
All that Fermina Daza wanted was to see her birthplace again, to confront it with her 
earliest memories, but no one was allowed to go there because of the dangers of the 
plague. Dr. Juvenal Urbino delivered the historic letter, which was then mislaid among 
other papers and never seen again, and the entire delegation almost suffocated in the 
tedium of the speeches. The pilot could not make the balloon ascend again, and at last 
they were led on muleback to the dock at Pueblo Viejo, where the swamp met the sea. 
Fermina Daza was sure she had passed through there with her mother when she was very 
young, in a cart drawn by a team of oxen. When she was older, she had repeated the story 
several times to her father, who died insisting that she could not possibly recall that. 

“I remember the trip very well, and what you say is accurate,” he told her, “but it 
happened at least five years before you were born.” 

Three days later the members of the balloon expedition, devastated by a bad night of 
storms, returned to their port of origin, where they received a heroes’ welcome. Lost in 
the crowd, of course, was Florentino Ariza, who recognized the traces of terror on 
Fermina Daza’s face. Nevertheless he saw her again that same afternoon in a cycling 
exhibition that was also sponsored by her husband, and she showed no sign of fatigue. 
She rode an uncommon velocipede that resembled something from a circus, with a very 
high front wheel, over which she was seated, and a very small back wheel that gave 
almost no support. She wore a pair of loose trousers trimmed in red, which scandalized 
the older ladies and disconcerted the gentlemen, but no one was indifferent to her skill. 

That, along with so many other ephemeral images in the course of so many years, 
would suddenly appear to Florentino Ariza at the whim of fate, and disappear again in the 
same way, leaving behind a throb of longing in his heart. Taken together, they marked the 
passage of his life, for he experienced the cruelty of time not so much in his own flesh as 
in the imperceptible changes he discerned in Fermina Daza each time he saw her. 

One night he went to Don Sancho’s Inn, an elegant colonial restaurant, and sat in the 
most remote corner, as was his custom when he ate his frugal meals alone. All at once, in 
the large mirror on the back wall, he caught a glimpse of Fermina Daza sitting at a table 
with her husband and two other couples, at an angle that allowed him to see her reflected 
in all her splendor. She was unguarded, she engaged in conversation with grace and 
laughter that exploded like fireworks, and her beauty was more radiant under the 
enormous teardrop chandeliers: once again, Alice had gone through the looking glass. 


Holding his breath, Florentino Ariza observed her at his pleasure: he saw her eat, he 
saw her hardly touch her wine, he saw her joke with the fourth in the line of Don 
Sanchos; from his solitary table he shared a moment of her life, and for more than an 
hour he lingered, unseen, in the forbidden precincts of her intimacy. Then he drank four 
more cups of coffee to pass the time until he saw her leave with the rest of the group. 
They passed so close to him that he could distinguish her scent among the clouds of other 
perfumes worn by her companions. 

From that night on, and for almost a year afterward, he laid unrelenting siege to the 
owner of the inn, offering him whatever he wanted, money or favors or whatever he 
desired most in life, if he would sell him the mirror. It was not easy, because old Don 
Sancho believed the legend that the beautiful frame, carved by Viennese cabinetmakers, 
was the twin of another, which had belonged to Marie Antoinette and had disappeared 
without a trace: a pair of unique jewels. When at last he surrendered, Florentino Ariza 
hung the mirror in his house, not for the exquisite frame but because of the place inside 
that for two hours had been occupied by her beloved reflection. 

When he saw Fermina Daza she was almost always on her husband’s arm, the two of 
them in perfect harmony, moving through their own space with the astonishing fluidity of 
Siamese cats, which was broken only when they stopped to greet him. Dr. Juvenal 
Urbino, in fact, shook his hand with warm cordiality, and on occasion even permitted 
himself a pat on the shoulder. She, on the other hand, kept him relegated to an impersonal 
regime of formalities and never made the slightest gesture that might allow him to 
suspect that she remembered him from her unmarried days. They lived in two different 
worlds, but while he made every effort to reduce the distance between them, every step 
she took was in the opposite direction. It was a long time before he dared to think that her 
indifference was no more than a shield for her timidity. This occurred to him suddenly, at 
the christening of the first freshwater vessel built in the local shipyards, which was also 
the first official occasion at which Florentino Ariza, as First Vice President of the R.C.C., 
represented Uncle Leo XII. This coincidence imbued the ceremony with special 
solemnity, and everyone of any significance in the life of the city was present. 

Florentino Ariza was looking after his guests in the main salon of the ship, still 
redolent of fresh paint and tar, when there was a burst of applause on the docks, and the 
band struck up a triumphal march. He had to repress the trembling that was almost as old 
as he was when he saw the beautiful woman of his dreams on her husband’s arm, 
splendid in her maturity, striding like a queen from another time past the honor guard in 
parade uniform, under the shower of paper streamers and flower petals tossed at them 
from the windows. Both responded to the ovation with a wave of the hand, but she was so 
dazzling, dressed in imperial gold from her high-heeled slippers and the foxtails at her 
throat to her bell-shaped hat, that she seemed to be alone in the midst of the crowd. 

Florentino Ariza waited for them on the bridge with the provincial officials, surrounded 
by the crash of the music and the fireworks and the three heavy screams from the ship, 
which enveloped the dock in steam. Juvenal Urbino greeted the members of the reception 
line with that naturalness so typical of him, which made everyone think the Doctor bore 
him a special fondness: first the ship’s captain in his dress uniform, then the Archbishop, 
then the Governor with his and the Mayor with his, and then the military commander, 
who was a newcomer from the Andes. Beyond the officials stood Florentino Ariza, 
dressed in dark clothing and almost invisible among so many eminent people. After 


greeting the military commander, Fermina seemed to hesitate before Florentino Ariza’s 
outstretched hand. The military man, prepared to introduce them, asked her if they did 
not know each other. She did not say yes and she did not say no, but she held out her 
hand to Florentino Ariza with a salon smile. The same thing had occurred twice in the 
past, and would occur again, and Florentino Ariza always accepted these occasions with a 
strength of character worthy of Fermina Daza. But that afternoon he asked himself, with 
his infinite capacity for illusion, if such pitiless indifference might not be a subterfuge for 
hiding the torments of love. 

The mere idea excited his youthful desires. Once again he haunted Fermina Daza’s 
villa, filled with the same longings he had felt when he was on duty in the little Park of 
the Evangels, but his calculated intention was not that she see him, but rather that he see 
her and know that she was still in the world. Now, however, it was difficult for him to 
escape notice. The District of La Manga was on a semi-deserted island, separated from 
the historic city by a canal of green water and covered by thickets of icaco plum, which 
had sheltered Sunday lovers in colonial times. In recent years, the old stone bridge built 
by the Spaniards had been torn down, and in its stead was one made of brick and lined 
with streetlamps for the new mule-drawn trolleys. At first the residents of La Manga had 
to endure a torture that had not been anticipated during construction, which was sleeping 
so close to the city’s first electrical plant whose vibration was a constant earthquake. Not 
even Dr. Juvenal Urbino, with all his prestige, could persuade them to move it where it 
would not disturb anyone, until his proven complicity with Divine Providence interceded 
on his behalf. One night the boiler in the plant blew up in a fearful explosion, flew over 
the new houses, sailed across half the city, and destroyed the largest gallery in the former 
convent of St. Julian the Hospitaler. The old ruined building had been abandoned at the 
beginning of the year, but the boiler caused the deaths of four prisoners who had escaped 
from the local jail earlier that night and were hiding in the chapel. 

The peaceful suburb with its beautiful tradition of love was, however, not the most 
propitious for unrequited love when it became a luxury neighborhood. The streets were 
dusty in summer, swamp-like in winter, and desolate all year round, and the scattered 
houses were hidden behind leafy gardens and had mosaic tile terraces instead of old-
fashioned projecting balconies, as if they had been built for the purpose of discouraging 
furtive lovers. It was just as well that at this time it became fashionable to drive out in the 
afternoon in hired old Victorias that had been converted to one-horse carriages, and that 
the excursion ended on a hill where one could appreciate the heartbreaking twilights of 
October better than from the lighthouse, and observe the watchful sharks lurking at the 
seminarians’ beach, and see the Thursday ocean liner, huge and white, that could almost 
be touched with one’s hands as it passed through the harbor channel. Florentino Ariza 
would hire a Victoria after a hard day at the office, but instead of folding down the top, as 
was customary during the hot months, he would stay hidden in the depths of the seat, 
invisible in the darkness, always alone, and requesting unexpected routes so as not to 
arouse the evil thoughts of the driver. In reality, the only thing that interested him on the 
drive was the pink marble Parthenon half hidden among leafy banana and mango trees, a 
luckless replica of the idyllic mansions on Louisiana cotton plantations. Fermina Daza’s 
children returned home a little before five. Florentino Ariza would see them arrive in the 
family carriage, and then he would see Dr. Juvenal Urbino leave for his routine house 
calls, but in almost a year of vigilance he never even caught the glimpse he so desired. 


One afternoon when he insisted on his solitary drive despite the first devastating rains 
of June, the horse slipped and fell in the mud. Florentino Ariza realized with horror that 
they were just in front of Fermina Daza’s villa, and he pleaded with the driver, not 
thinking that his consternation might betray him. 

“Not here, please,” he shouted. “Anywhere but here.” 

Bewildered by his urgency, the driver tried to raise the horse without unharnessing 
him, and the axle of the carriage broke. Florentino Ariza managed to climb out of the 
coach in the driving rain and endure his embarrassment until passersby in other carriages 
offered to take him home. While he was waiting, a servant of the Urbino family “ad seen 
him, his clothes soaked through, standing in mud up to his Knees, and she brought him an 
umbrella so that he could take refuge on the terrace. In the wildest of his deliriums 
Florentino Ariza had never dreamed of such good fortune, but on that afternoon he would 
have died rather than allow Fermina Daza to see him in that condition. 

When they lived in the old city, Juvenal Urbino and his family would walk on Sundays 
from their house to the Cathedral for eight o’clock Mass, which for them was more a 
secular ceremony than a religious one. Then, when they moved, they continued to drive 
there for several years, and at times they visited with friends under the palm trees in the 
park. But when the temple of the theological seminary was built in La Manga, with a 
private beach and its own cemetery, they no longer went to the Cathedral except on very 
solemn occasions. Ignorant of these changes, Florentino Ariza waited Sunday after 
Sunday on the terrace of the Parish Café, watching the people coming out of all three 
Masses. Then he realized his mistake and went to the new church, which was fashionable 
until just a few years ago, and there, at eight o’clock sharp on four Sundays in August, he 
saw Dr. Juvenal Urbino with his children, but Fermina Daza was not with them. On one 
of those Sundays he visited the new cemetery adjacent to the church, where the residents 
of La Manga were building their sumptuous pantheons, and his heart skipped a beat when 
he discovered the most sumptuous of all in the shade of the great ceiba trees. It was 
already complete, with Gothic stained-glass windows and marble angels and gravestones 
with gold lettering for the entire family. Among them, of course, was that of Doña 
Fermina Daza de Urbino de la Calle, and next to it her husband’s, with a common 
epitaph: Together still in the peace of the Lord. 

For the rest of the year, Fermina Daza did not attend any civic or social ceremonies, not 
even the Christmas celebrations, in which she and her husband had always been 
illustrious protagonists. But her absence was most notable on the opening night of the 
opera season. During intermission, Florentino Ariza happened on a group that, beyond 
any doubt, was discussing her without mentioning her name. They said that one midnight 
the previous June someone had seen her boarding the Cunard ocean liner en route to 
Panama, and that she wore a dark veil to hide the ravages of the shameful disease that 
was consuming her. Someone asked what terrible illness would dare to attack a woman 
with so much power, and the answer he received was saturated with black bile: 

“A lady so distinguished could suffer only from consumption.” 

Florentino Ariza knew that the wealthy of his country did not contract short-term 
diseases. Either they died without warning, almost always on the eve of a major holiday 
that could not be celebrated because of the period of mourning, or they faded away in 
long, abominable illnesses whose most intimate details eventually became public 
knowledge. Seclusion in Panama was almost an obligatory penance in the life of the rich. 


They submitted to God’s will in the Adventist Hospital, an immense white warehouse 
lost in the prehistoric downpours of Darién, where the sick lost track of the little life that 
was left to them, and in whose solitary rooms with their burlap windows no one could tell 
with certainty if the smell of carbolic acid was the odor of health or of death. Those who 
recovered came back bearing splendid gifts that they would distribute with a free hand 
and a kind of agonized longing to be pardoned for their indiscretion in still being alive. 
Some returned with their abdomens crisscrossed by barbarous stitches that seemed to 
have been sewn with cobbler’s hemp; they would raise their shirts to display them when 
people came to visit, they compared them with those of others who had suffocated from 
excesses of joy, and for the rest of their days they would describe and describe again the 
angelic visions they had seen under the influence of chloroform. On the other hand, no 
one ever learned about the visions of those who did not return, including the saddest of 
them all: those who had died as exiles in the tuberculosis pavilion, more from the sadness 
of the rain than because of the complications of their disease. 

If he had been forced to choose, Florentino Ariza did not know which fate he would 
have wanted for Fermina Daza. More than anything else he wanted the truth, but no 
matter how unbearable, and regardless of how he searched, he could not find it. It was 
inconceivable to him that no one could even give him a hint that would confirm the story 
he had heard. In the world of riverboats, which was his world, no mystery could be 
maintained, no secret could be kept. And yet no one had heard anything about the woman 
in the black veil. No one knew anything in a city where everything was known, and 
where many things were known even before they happened, above all if they concerned 
the rich. But no one had any explanation for the disappearance of Fermina Daza. 
Florentino Ariza continued to patrol La Manga, continued to hear Mass without devotion 
in the basilica of the seminary, continued to attend civic ceremonies that never would 
have interested him in another state of mind, but the passage of time only increased the 
credibility of the story he had heard. Everything seemed normal in the Urbino household, 
except for the mother’s absence. 

As he carried on his investigation, he learned about other events he had not known of 
or into which he had made no inquiries, including the death of Lorenzo Daza in the 
Cantabrian village where he had been born. He remembered seeing him for many years in 
the rowdy chess wars at the Parish Café, hoarse with so much talking, and growing fatter 
and rougher as he sank into the quicksand of an unfortunate old age. They had never 
exchanged another word since their disagreeable breakfast of anise in the previous 
century, and Florentino Ariza was certain that even after he had obtained for his daughter 
the successful marriage that had become his only reason for living, Lorenzo Daza 
remembered him with as much rancor as he felt toward Lorenzo Daza. But he was so 
determined to find out the unequivocal facts regarding Fermina Daza’s health that he returned 
to the Parish Café to learn them from her father, just at the time of the historic 
tournament in which Jeremiah de Saint-Amour alone confronted forty-two opponents. 
This was how he discovered that Lorenzo Daza had died, and he rejoiced with all his 
heart, although the price of his joy might be having to live without the truth. At last he 
accepted as true the story of the hospital for the terminally ill, and his only consolation 
was the old saying: Sick women live forever. On the days when he felt disheartened, he 
resigned himself to the notion that the news of Fermina Daza’s death, if it should occur, 
would find him without his having to look for it. 


It never did, for Fermina Daza was alive and well on the ranch, half a league from the 
village of Flores de María, where her Cousin Hildebranda Sánchez was living, forgotten 
by the world. She had left with no scandal, by mutual agreement with her husband, both 
of them as entangled as adolescents in the only serious crisis they had suffered during so 
many years of stable matrimony. It had taken them by surprise in the repose of their 
maturity, when they felt themselves safe from misfortune’s sneak attacks, their children 
grown and well-behaved, and the future ready for them to learn how to be old without 
bitterness. It had been something so unexpected for them both that they wanted to resolve 
it not with shouts, tears, and intermediaries, as was the custom in the Caribbean, but with 
the wisdom of the nations of Europe, and there was so much vacillation as to whether 
their loyalties lay here or over there that they ended up mired in a puerile situation that 
did not belong anywhere. At last she decided to leave, not even knowing why or to what 
purpose, out of sheer fury, and he, inhibited by his sense of guilt, had not been able to 
dissuade her. 

Fermina Daza, in fact, had sailed at midnight in the greatest secrecy and with her face 
covered by a black mantilla, not on a Cunard liner bound for Panama, however, but on 
the regular boat to San Juan de la Ciénaga, the city where she had been born and had 
lived until her adolescence, and for which she felt a growing homesickness that became 
more and more difficult to bear as the years went by. In defiance of her husband’s will, 
and of the customs of the day, her only companion was a fifteen-year-old goddaughter 
who had been raised as a family servant, but the ship captains and the officials at each 
port had been notified of her journey. When she made her rash decision, she told her 
children that she was going to have a change of scene for three months or so with Aunt 
Hildebranda, but her determination was not to return. Dr. Juvenal Urbino knew the 
strength of her character very well, and he was so troubled that he accepted her decision 
with humility as God’s punishment for the gravity of his sins. But the lights on the boat 
had not yet been lost to view when they both repented of their weakness. 

Although they maintained a formal correspondence concerning their children and other 
household matters, almost two years went by before either one could find a way back that 
was not mined with pride. During the second year, the children went to spend their school 
vacation in Flores de María, and Fermina Daza did the impossible and appeared content 
with her new life. That at least was the conclusion drawn by Juvenal Urbino from his 
son’s letters. Moreover, at that time the Bishop of Riohacha went there on a pastoral visit, 
riding under the pallium on his celebrated white mule with the trappings embroidered in 
gold. Behind him came pilgrims from remote regions, musicians playing accordions, 
peddlers selling food and amulets; and for three days the ranch was overflowing with the 
crippled and the hopeless, who in reality did not come for the learned sermons and the 
plenary indulgences but for the favors of the mule who, it was said, performed miracles 
behind his master’s back. The Bishop had frequented the home of the Urbino de la Calle 
family ever since his days as an ordinary priest, and one afternoon he escaped from the 
public festivities to have lunch at Hildebranda’s ranch. After the meal, during which they 
spoke only of earthly matters, he took Fermina Daza aside and asked to hear her 
confession. She refused in an amiable but firm manner, with the explicit argument that 
she had nothing to repent of. Although it was not her purpose, at least not her conscious 
purpose, she was certain that her answer would reach the appropriate ears. 

Dr. Juvenal Urbino used to say, not without a certain cynicism, that it was not he who 


was to blame for those two bitter years of his life but his wife’s bad habit of smelling the 
clothes her family took off, and the clothes that she herself took off, so that she could tell 
by the odor if they needed to be laundered even though they might appear to be clean. 
She had done this ever since she was a girl, and she never thought it worthy of comment 
until her husband realized what she was doing on their wedding night. He also knew that 
she locked herself in the bathroom at least three times a day to smoke, but this did not 
attract his attention because the women of his class were in the habit of locking 
themselves away in groups to talk about men and smoke, and even to drink as much as 
two liters of aguardiente until they had passed out on the floor in a brickmason’s drunken 
stupor. But her habit of sniffing at all the clothing she happened across seemed to him not 
only inappropriate but unhealthy as well. She took it as a joke, which is what she did with 
everything she did not care to discuss, and she said that God had not put that diligent 
oriole’s beak on her face just for decoration. One morning, while she was at the market, 
the servants aroused the entire neighborhood in their search for her three-year-old son, 
who was not to be found anywhere in the house. She arrived in the middle of the panic, 
turned around two or three times like a tracking mastiff, and found the boy asleep in an 
armoire where no one thought he could possibly be hiding. When her astonished husband 
asked her how she had found him, she replied: 

“By the smell of caca.” 

The truth is that her sense of smell not only served her in regard to washing clothes or 
finding lost children: it was the sense that oriented her in all areas of life, above all in her 
social life. Juvenal Urbino had observed this throughout his marriage, in particular at the 
beginning, when she was the parvenu in a milieu that had been prejudiced against her for 
three hundred years, and yet she had made her way through coral reefs as sharp as knives, 
not colliding with anyone, with a power over the world that could only be a supernatural 
instinct. That frightening faculty, which could just as well have had its origin in a 
millenarian wisdom as in a heart of stone, met its moment of misfortune one ill-fated 
Sunday before Mass when, out of simple habit, Fermina Daza sniffed the clothing her 
husband had worn the evening before and experienced the disturbing sensation that she 
had been in bed with another man. 

First she smelled the jacket and the vest while she took the watch chain out of the 
buttonhole and removed the pencil holder and the billfold and the loose change from the 
pockets and placed everything on the dresser, and then she smelled the hemmed shirt as 
she removed the tiepin and the topaz cuff links and the gold collar button, and then she 
smelled the trousers as she removed the keyholder with its eleven keys and the penknife 
with its mother-of-pearl handle, and finally she smelled the underwear and the socks and 
the linen handkerchief with the embroidered monogram. Beyond any shadow of a doubt 
there was an odor in each of the articles that had not been there in all their years of life 
together, an odor impossible to define because it was not the scent of flowers or of 
artificial essences but of something peculiar to human nature. She said nothing, and she 
did not notice the odor every day, but she now sniffed at her husband’s clothing not to 
decide if it was ready to launder but with an unbearable anxiety that gnawed at her 
innermost being. 

Fermina Daza did not know where to locate the odor of his clothing in her husband’s 
routine. It could not be placed between his morning class and lunch, for she supposed that 
no woman in her right mind would make hurried love at that time of day, least of all with 


a visitor, when the house still had to be cleaned, and the beds made, and the marketing 
done, and lunch prepared, and perhaps with the added worry that one of the children 
would be sent home early from school because somebody threw a stone at him and hurt 
his head and he would find her at eleven o’clock in the morning, naked in the unmade 
bed and, to make matters worse, with a doctor on top of her. She also knew that Dr. 
Juvenal Urbino made love only at night, better yet in absolute darkness, and as a last 
resort before breakfast when the first birds began to chirp. After that time, as he would 
say, it was more work than the pleasure of daytime love was worth to take off one’s 
clothes and put them back on again. So that the contamination of his clothing could occur 
only during one of his house calls or during some moment stolen from his nights of chess 
and films. This last possibility was difficult to prove, because unlike so many of her 
friends, Fermina Daza was too proud to spy on her husband or to ask someone else to do 
it for her. His schedule of house calls, which seemed best suited to infidelity, was also the 
easiest to keep an eye on, because Dr. Juvenal Urbino kept a detailed record of each of 
his patients, including the payment of his fees, from the first time he visited them until he 
ushered them out of this world with a final sign of the cross and some words for the 
salvation of their souls. 

In the three weeks that followed, Fermina Daza did not find the odor in his clothing for 
a few days, she found it again when she least expected it, and then she found it, stronger 
than ever, for several days in a row, although one of those days was a Sunday when there 
had been a family gathering and the two of them had not been apart for even a moment. 
Contrary to her normal custom and even her own desires, she found herself in her 
husband’s office one afternoon as if she were someone else, doing something that she 
would never do, deciphering with an exquisite Bengalese magnifying glass his intricate 
notes on the house calls he had made during the last few months. It was the first time she 
had gone alone into that office, saturated with showers of creosote and crammed with 
books bound in the hides of unknown animals, blurred school pictures, honorary degrees, 
astrolabes, and elaborately worked daggers collected over the years: a secret sanctuary 
that she always considered the only part of her husband’s private life to which she had no 
access because it was not part of love, so that the few times she had been there she had 
gone with him, and the visits had always been very brief. She did not feel she had the 
right to go in alone, much less to engage in what seemed to be indecent prying. But there 
she was. She wanted to find the truth, and she searched for it with an anguish almost as 
great as her terrible fear of finding it, and she was driven by an irresistible wind even 
stronger than her innate haughtiness, even stronger than her dignity: an agony that 
bewitched her. 

She was able to draw no conclusions, because her husband’s patients, except for 
mutual friends, were part of his private domain; they were people without identity, 
known not by their faces but by their pains, not by the color of their eyes or the evasions 
of their hearts but by the size of their livers, the coating on their tongues, the blood in 
their urine, the hallucinations of their feverish nights. They were people who believed in 
her husband, who believed they lived because of him when in reality they lived for him, 
and who in the end were reduced to a phrase written in his own hand at the bottom of the 
medical file: Be calm. God awaits you at the door. Fermina Daza left his study after two 
fruitless hours, with the feeling that she had allowed herself to be seduced by indecency. 

Urged on by her imagination, she began to discover changes in her husband. She found 


him evasive, without appetite at the table or in bed, prone to exasperation and ironic 
answers, and whe n he was at home he was no longer the tranquil man he had once been 
but a caged lion. For the first time since their marriage, she began to monitor the times he 
was late, to keep track of them to the minute, to tell him lies in order to learn the truth, 
but then she felt wounded to the quick by the contradictions. One night she awoke with a 
start, terrified by a vision of her husband staring at her in the darkness with eyes that 
seemed full of hatred. She had suffered a similar fright in her youth, when she had seen 
Florentino Ariza at the foot of her bed, but that apparition had been full of love, not hate. 
Besides, this time it was not fantasy: her husband was awake at two in the morning, 
sitting up in bed to watch her while she slept, but when she asked him why, he denied it. 
He lay back on the pillow and said: 

“You must have been dreaming.” 

After that night, and after similar episodes that occurred during that time, when 
Fermina Daza could not tell for certain where reality ended and where illusion began, she 
had the overwhelming revelation that she was losing her mind. At last she realized that 
her husband had not taken Communion on the Thursday of Corpus Christi or on any 
Sunday in recent weeks, and he had not found time for that year’s retreats. When she 
asked him the reason for those unusual changes in his spiritual health, she received an 
evasive answer. This was the decisive clue, because he had not failed to take Communion 
on an important feast day since he had made his first Communion, at the age of eight. In 
this way she realized not only that her husband was in a state of mortal sin but that he had 
resolved to persist in it, since he did not go to his confessor for help. She had never 
imagined that she could suffer so much for something that seemed to be the absolute 
opposite of love, but she was suffering, and she resolved that the only way she could keep 
from dying was to burn out the nest of vipers that was poisoning her soul. And that is 
what she did. One afternoon she began to darn socks on the terrace while her husband 
was reading, as he did every day after his siesta. Suddenly she interrupted her work, 
pushed her eyeglasses up onto her forehead, and without any trace of harshness, she 
asked for an explanation: 

“Doctor.” 

He was immersed in L’Ile des pingouins, the novel that everyone was reading in those 
days, and he answered without surfacing: “Oui.” She insisted: 

“Look at me.” 

He did so, looking without seeing her through the fog of his reading glasses, but he did 
not have to take them off to feel burned by the raging fire in her eyes. 

“What is going on?” he asked. 

“You know better than I,” she said. 

That was all she said. She lowered her glasses and continued darning socks. Dr. 
Juvenal Urbino knew then that the long hours of anguish were over. The moment had not 
been as he had foreseen it; rather than a seismic tremor in his heart, it was a calming 
blow, and a great relief that what was bound to happen sooner or later had happened 
sooner rather than later: the ghost of Miss Barbara Lynch had entered his house at last. 

Dr. Juvenal Urbino had met her four months earlier as she waited her turn in the clinic 
of Misericordia Hospital, and he knew immediately that something irreparable had just 
occurred in his destiny. She was a tall, elegant, large-boned mulatta, with skin the color 
and softness of molasses, and that morning she wore a red dress with white polka dots 


and a broad-brimmed hat of the same fabric, which shaded her face down to her eyelids. 
Her sex seemed more pronounced than that of other human beings. Dr. Juvenal Urbino 
did not attend patients in the clinic, but whenever he passed by and had time to spare, he 
would go in to remind his more advanced students that there is no medicine better than a 
good diagnosis. So that he arranged to be present at the examination of the unforeseen 
mulatta, making certain that his pupils would not notice any gesture of his that did not 
appear to be casua l and barely looking at her, but fixing her name and address with care 
in his memory. That afternoon, after his last house call, he had his carriage pass by the 
address that she had given in the consulting room, and in fact there she was, enjoying the 
coolness on her terrace. 

It was a typical Antillean house, painted yellow even to the tin roof, with burlap 
windows and pots of carnations and ferns hanging in the doorway. It rested on wooden 
pilings in the salt marshes of Mala Crianza. A troupial sang in the cage that hung from 
the eaves. Across the street was a primary school, and the children rushing out obliged 
the coachman to keep a tight hold on the reins so that the horse would not shy. It was a 
stroke of luck, for Miss Barbara Lynch had time to recognize the Doctor. She waved to 
him as if they were old friends, she invited him to have coffee while the confusion 
abated, and he was delighted to accept (although it was not his custom to drink coffee) 
and to listen to her talk about herself, which was the only thing that had interested him 
since the morning and the only thing that was going to interest him, without a moment’s 
respite, during the months to follow. Once, soon after he had married, a friend told him, 
with his wife present, that sooner or later he would have to confront a mad passion that 
could endanger the stability of his marriage. He, who thought he knew himself, knew the 
strength of his moral roots, had laughed at the prediction. And now it had come true. 

Miss Barbara Lynch, Doctor of Theology, was the only child of the Reverend Jonathan 

B. Lynch, a lean black Protestant minister who rode on a mule through the poverty-
stricken settlements in the salt marshes, preaching the word of one of the many gods that 
Dr. Juvenal Urbino wrote with a small g to distinguish them from his. She spoke good 
Spanish, with a certain roughness in the syntax, and her frequent slips heightened her 
charm. She would be twenty-eight years old in December, not long ago she had divorced 
another minister, who was a student of her father’s and to whom she had been unhappily 
married for two years, and she had no desire to repeat the offense. She said: “I have no 
more love than my troupial.” But Dr. Urbino was too serious to think that she said it with 
hidden intentions. On the contrary: he asked himself in bewilderment if so many 
opportunities coming together might not be one of God’s pitfalls, which he would then 
have to pay for dearly, but he dismissed the thought without delay as a piece of 
theological nonsense resulting from his state of confusion. 
As he was about to leave, he made a casual remark about that morning’s medical 
consultation, knowing that nothing pleases patients more than talking about their 
ailments, and she was so splendid talking about hers that he promised he would return the 
next day, at four o’clock sharp, to examine her with greater care. She was dis mayed: she 
knew that a doctor of his qualifications was far above her ability to pay, but he reassured 
her: “In this profession we try to have the rich pay for the poor.” Then he marked in his 
notebook: Miss Barbara Lynch, Mala Crianza Salt Marsh, Saturday, 4 p.m. Months later, 
Fermina Daza was to read that notation, augmented by details of the diagnosis, treatment, 
and evolution of the disease. The name attracted her attention, and it suddenly occurred to 


her that she was one of those dissolute artists from the New Orleans fruit boats, but the 
address made her think that she must come from Jamaica, a black woman, of course, and 
she eliminated her without a second thought as not being to her husband’s taste. 

Dr. Juvenal Urbino came ten minutes early for the Saturday appointment, and Miss 
Lynch had not finished dressing to receive him. He had not felt so much tension since his 
days in Paris when he had to present himself for an oral examination. As she lay on her 
canvas bed, wearing a thin silk slip, Miss Lynch’s beauty was endless. Everything about 
her was large and intense: her siren’s thighs, her slow-burning skin, her astonished 
breasts, her diaphanous gums with their perfect teeth, her whole body radiating a vapor of 
good health that was the human odor Fermina Daza had discovered in her husband’s 
clothing. She had gone to the clinic because she suffered from something that she, with 
much charm, called “twisted colons,” and Dr. Urbino thought that it was a symptom that 
should not be ignored. So he palpated her internal organs with more intention than 
attention, and as he did so he discovered in amazement that this marvelous creature was 
as beautiful inside as out, and then he gave himself over to the delights of touch, no 
longer the best-qualified physician along the Caribbean coastline but a poor soul 
tormented by his tumultuous instincts. Only once before in his austere professional life 
had something similar happened to him, and that had been the day of his greatest shame, 
because the indignant patient had moved his hand away, sat up in bed, and said to him: 
“What you want may happen, but it will not be like this.” Miss Lynch, on the other hand, 
abandoned herself to his hands, and when she was certain that the Doctor was no longer 
thinking about his science, she said: 

“I thought this not permitted by your ethics.” 

He was as drenched by perspiration as if he had just stepped out of a pool wearing all 
his clothes, and he dried his hands and face with a towel. 

“Our code of ethics supposes,” he said, “that we doctors are made of wood.” 

“The fact I thought so does not mean you cannot do,” she said. “Just think what it mean 
for poor black woman like me to have such a famous man notice her.” 

“I have not stopped thinking about you for an instant,” he said. 

It was so tremulous a confession that it might have inspired pity. But she saved him 
from all harm with a laugh that lit up the bedroom. 

“I know since I saw you in hospital, Doctor,” she said. “Black I am but not a fool.” 

It was far from easy. Miss Lynch wanted her honor protected, she wanted security and 
love, in that order, and she believed that she deserved them. She gave Dr. Urbino the 
opportunity to seduce her but not to penetrate her inner sanctum, even when she was 
alone in the house. She would go no further than allowing him to repeat the ceremony of 
palpation and auscultation with all the ethical violations he could desire, but without 
taking off her clothes. For his part, he could not let go of the bait once he had bitten, and 
he continued his almost daily incursions. For reasons of a practical nature, it was close to 
impossible for him to maintain a continuing relationship with Miss Lynch, but he was too 
weak to stop, as he would later be too weak to go any further. This was his limit. 

The Reverend Lynch did not lead a regular life, for he would ride away on his mule on 
the spur of the moment, carrying Bibles and evangelical pamphlets on one side and 
provisions on the other, and he would return when least expected. Another difficulty was 
the school across the street, for the children would recite their lessons as they looked out 
the windows, and what they saw with greatest clarity was the house across the way, with 


its doors and windows open wide from six o’clock in the morning, they saw Miss Lynch 
hanging the birdcage from the eaves so that the troupial could learn the recited lessons, 
they saw her wearing a bright-colored turban and going about her househo ld tasks as she 
recited along with them in her brilliant Caribbean voice, and later they saw her sitting on 
the porch, reciting the afternoon psalms by herself in English. 

They had to choose a time when the children were not there, and there were only two 
possibilities: the afternoon recess for lunch, between twelve and two, which was also 
when the Doctor had his lunch, or late in the afternoon, after the children had gone home. 
This was always the best time, although by then the Doctor had made his rounds and had 
only a few minutes to spare before it was time for him to eat with his family. The third 
problem, and the most serious for him, was his own situation. It was not possible for him 
to go there without his carriage, which was very well known and always had to wait 
outside her door. He could have made an accomplice of his coachman, as did most of his 
friends at the Social Club, but that was not in his nature. In fact, when his visits to Miss 
Lynch became too obvious, the liveried family coachman himself dared to ask if it would 
not be better for him to come back later so that the carriage would not spend so much 
time at her door. Dr. Urbino, in a sharp response that was not typical of him, cut him off. 

“This is the first time since I know you that I have heard you say something you should 
not have,” he said. “Well, then: I will assume it was never said.” 

There was no solution. In a city like this, it was impossible to hide an illness when the 
Doctor’s carriage stood at the door. At times the Doctor himself took the initiative and 
went on foot, if distance permitted, or in a hired carriage, to avoid malicious or premature 
assumptions. Such deceptions, however, were to little avail. Since the prescriptions 
ordered in pharmacies revealed the truth, Dr. Urbino would always prescribe counterfeit 
medicines along with the correct ones in order to preserve the sacred right of the sick to 
die in peace along with the secret of their illness. Similarly, he was able in various 
truthful ways to account for the presence of his carriage outside the house of Miss Lynch, 
but he could not allow it to stay there too long, least of all for the amount of time he 
would have desired, which was the rest of his life. 

The world became a hell for him. For once the initial madness was sated, they both 
became aware of the risks involved, and Dr. Juvenal Urbino never had the resolve to face 
a scandal. In the deliriums of passion he promised everything, but when it was over, 
everything was left for later. On the other hand, as his desire to be with her grew, so did 
his fear of losing her, so that their meetings became more and more hurried and 
problematic. He thought about nothing else. He waited for the afternoons with unbearable 
longing, he forgot his other commitments, he forgot everything but her, but as his 
carriage approached the Mala Crianza salt marsh he prayed to God that an unforeseen 
obstacle would force it to drive past. He went to her in a state of such anguish that at 
times as he turned the corner he was glad to catch a glimpse of the woolly head of the 
Reverend Lynch, who read on the terrace while his daughter catechized neighborhood 
children in the living room with recited passages of scripture. Then he would go home 
relieved that he was not defying fate again, but later he would feel himself going mad 
with the desire for it to be five o’clock in the afternoon all day, every day. 

So their love became impossible when the carriage at her door became too 
conspicuous, and after three months it became nothing less than ridiculous. Without time 
to say anything, Miss Lynch would go to the bedroom as soon as she saw her agitated 


lover walk in the door. She took the precaution of wearing a full skirt on the days she 
expected him, a charming skirt from Jamaica with red flowered ruffles, but with no 
underwear, nothing, in the belief that this convenience was going to help him ward off his 
fear. But he squandered everything she did to make him happy. Panting and drenched 
with perspiration, he rushed after her into the bedroom, throwing everything on the floor, 
his walking stick, his medical bag, his Panama hat, and he made panic-stricken love with 
his trousers down around his knees, with his jacket buttoned so that it would not get in his 
way, with his gold watch chain across his vest, with his shoes on, with everything on, and 
more concerned with leaving as soon as possible than with achieving pleasure. She was 
left dangling, barely at the entrance of her tunnel of solitude, while he was already 
buttoning up again, as exhausted as if he had made absolute love on the dividing line 
between life and death, when in reality he had accomplished no more than the physical 
act that is only a part of the feat of love. But he had finished in time: the exact time 
needed to give an injection during a routine visit. Then he returned home ashamed of his 
weakness, longing for death, cursing himself for the lack of courage that kept him from 
asking Fermina Daza to pull down his trousers and burn his ass on the brazier. 

He did not eat, he said his prayers without conviction, in bed he pretended to continue 
his siesta reading while his wife walked round and round the house putting the world in 
order before going to bed. As he nodded over his book, he began to sink down into the inevitable 
mangrove swamp of Miss Lynch, into her air of a recumbent forest glade, his 
deathbed, and then he could think of nothing except tomorrow’s five minutes to five 
o’clock in the afternoon and her waiting for him in bed with nothing but the mound of her 
dark bush under her madwoman’s skirt from Jamaica: the hellish circle. 

In the past few years he had become conscious of the burden of his own body. He 
recognized the symptoms. He had read about them in textbooks, he had seen them 
confirmed in real life, in older patients with no history of serious ailments who suddenly 
began to describe perfect syndromes that seemed to come straight from medical texts and 
yet turned out to be imaginary. His professor of children’s clinical medicine at La 
Salpêtrière had recommended pediatrics as the most honest specialization, because 
children become sick only when in fact they are sick, and they cannot communicate with 
the physician using conventional words but only with concrete symptoms of real 
diseases. After a certain age, however, adults either had the symptoms without the 
diseases or, what was worse, serious diseases with the symptoms of minor ones. He 
distracted them with palliatives, giving time enough time to teach them not to feel their 
ailments, so that they could live with them in the rubbish heap of old age. Dr. Juvenal 
Urbino never thought that a physician his age, who believed he had seen everything, 
would not be able to overcome the uneasy feeling that he was ill when he was not. Or 
what was worse, not believe he was, out of pure scientific prejudice, when perhaps he 
really was. At the age of forty, half in earnest and half in jest, he had said in class: “All I 
need in life is someone who understands me.” But when he found himself lost in the 
labyrinth of Miss Lynch, he no longer was jesting. 

All the real or imaginary symptoms of his older patients made their appearance in his 
body. He felt the shape of his liver with such clarity that he could tell its size without 
touching it. He felt the dozing cat’s purr of his kidneys, he felt the iridescent brilliance of 
his vesicles, he felt the humming blood in his arteries. At times he awoke at dawn 
gasping for air, like a fish out of water. He had fluid in his heart. He felt it lose the beat 


for a moment, he felt it syncopate like a school marching band, once, twice, and then, 
because God is good, he felt it recover at last. But instead of having recourse to the same 
distracting remedies he gave to his patients, he went mad with terror. It was true: all he 
needed in life, even at the age of fifty-eight, was someone who understood him. So he 
turned to Fermina Daza, the person who loved him best and whom he loved best in the 
world, and with whom he had just eased his conscience. 

For this occurred after she interrupted his afternoon reading to ask him to look at her, 
and he had the first indication that his hellish circle had been discovered. But he did not 
know how, because it would have been impossible for him to conceive of Fermina 
Daza’s learning the truth by smell alone. In any case, for a long time this had not been a 
good city for keeping secrets. Soon after the first home telephones were installed, several 
marriages that seemed stable were destroyed by anonymous tale-bearing calls, and a 
number of frightened families either canceled their service or refused to have a telephone 
for many years. Dr. Urbino knew that his wife had too much self-respect to allow so 
much as an attempt at anonymous betrayal by telephone, and he could not imagine 
anyone daring to try it under his own name. But he feared the old method: a note slipped 
under the door by an unknown hand could be effective, not only because it guaranteed the 
double anonymity of sender and receiver, but because its time-honored ancestry 
permitted one to attribute to it some kind of metaphysical connection to the designs of 
Divine Providence. 

Jealousy was unknown in his house: during more than thirty years of conjugal peace, 
Dr. Urbino had often boasted in public--and until now it had been true--that he was like 
those Swedish matches that light only with their own box. But he did not know how a 
woman with as much pride, dignity, and strength of character as his wife would react in 
the face of proven infidelity. So that after looking at her as she had asked, nothing 
occurred to him but to lower his eyes again in order to hide his embarrassment and 
continue the pretense of being lost among the sweet, meandering rivers of Alca Island 
until he could think of something else. Fermina Daza, for her part, said nothing more 
either. When she finished darning the socks, she tossed everything into the sewing basket 
in no particular order, gave instructions in the kitchen for supper, and went to the 
bedroom. 

Then he reached the admirable decision not to go to Miss Lynch’s house at five o’clock 
in the afternoon. The vows of eternal love, the dream of a discreet house for her alone 
where he could visit her with no unexpected interruptions, their unhurried happiness for 
as long as they lived--everything he had promised in the blazing heat of love was 
canceled forever after. The last thing Miss Lynch received from him was an emerald tiara 
in a little box wrapped in paper from the pharmacy, so that the coachman himself thought 
it was an emergency prescription and handed it to her with no comment, no message, 
nothing in writing. Dr. Urbino never saw her again, not even by accident, and God alone 
knows how much grief his heroic resolve cost him or how many bitter tears he had to 
shed behind the locked lavatory door in order to sur vive this private catastrophe. At five 
o’clock, instead of going to see her, he made a profound act of contrition before his 
confessor, and on the following Sunday he took Communion, his heart broken but his 
soul at peace. 

That night, following his renunciation, as he was undressing for bed, he recited for 
Fermina Daza the bitter litany of his early morning insomnia, his sudden stabbing pains, 


his desire to weep in the afternoon, the encoded symptoms of secret love, which he 
recounted as if they were the miseries of old age. He had to tell someone or die, or else 
tell the truth, and so the relief he obtained was sanctified within the domestic rituals of 
love. She listened to him with close attention, but without looking at him, without saying 
anything as she picked up every article of clothing he removed, sniffed it with no gesture 
or change of expression that might betray her wrath, then crumpled it and tossed it into 
the wicker basket for dirty clothes. She did not find the odor, but it was all the same: 
tomorrow was another day. Before he knelt down to pray before the altar in the bedroom, 
he ended the recital of his misery with a sigh as mournful as it was sincere: “I think I am 
going to die.” She did not even blink when she replied. 

“That would be best,” she said. “Then we could both have some peace.” 

Years before, during the crisis of a dangerous illness, he had spoken of the possibility 
of dying, and she had made the same brutal reply. Dr. Urbino attributed it to the natural 
hardheartedness of women, which allows the earth to continue revolving around the sun, 
because at that time he did not know that she always erected a barrier of wrath to hide her 
fear. And in this case it was the most terrible one of all, the fear of losing him. 

That night, on the other hand, she wished him dead with all her heart, and this certainty 
alarmed him. Then he heard her slow sobbing in the darkness as she bit the pillow so he 
would not hear. He was puzzled, because he knew that she did not cry easily for any 
affliction of body or soul. She cried only in rage, above all if it had its origins in her 
terror of culpability, and then the more she cried the more enraged she became, because 
she could never forgive her weakness in crying. He did not dare to console her, knowing 
that it would have been like consoling a tiger run through by a spear, and he did not have 
the courage to tell her that the reason for her weeping had disappeared that afternoon, had 
been pulled out by the roots, forever, even from his memory. 

Fatigue overcame him for a few minutes. When he awoke, she had lit her dim bedside 
lamp and lay there with her eyes open, but without crying. Something definitive had 
happened to her while he slept: the sediment that had accumulated at the bottom of her 
life over the course of so many years had been stirred up by the torment of her jealousy 
and had floated to the surface, and it had aged her all at once. Shocked by her sudden 
wrinkles, her faded lips, the ashes in her hair, he risked telling her that she should try to 
sleep: it was after two o’clock. She spoke, not looking at him but with no trace of rage in 
her voice, almost with gentleness. 

“I have a right to know who she is,” she said. 

And then he told her everything, feeling as if he were lifting the weight of the world 
from his shoulders, because he was convinced that she already knew and only needed to 
confirm the details. But she did not, of course, so that as he spoke she began to cry again, 
not with her earlier timid sobs but with abundant salty tears that ran down her cheeks and 
burned her nightdress and inflamed her life, because he had not done what she, with her 
heart in her mouth, had hoped he would do, which was to be a man: deny everything, and 
swear on his life it was not true, and grow indignant at the false accusation, and shout 
curses at this ill-begotten society that did not hesitate to trample on one’s honor, and 
remain imperturbable even when faced with crushing proofs of his disloyalty. Then, 
when he told her that he had been with his confessor that afternoon, she feared she would 
go blind with rage. Ever since her days at the Academy she had been convinced that the 
men and women of the Church lacked any virtue inspired by God. This was a discordant 


note in the harmony of the house, which they had managed to overlook without mishap. 
But her husband’s allowing his confessor to be privy to an intimacy that was not only his 
but hers as well was more than she could bear. 

“You might as well have told a snake charmer in the market,” she said. 

For her it was the end of everything. She was sure that her honor was the subject of 
gossip even before her husband had finished his penance, and the feeling of humiliation 
that this produced in her was much less tolerable than the shame and anger and injustice 
caused by his infidelity. And worst of all, damn it: with a black woman. He corrected her: 
“With a mulatta.” But by then it was too late for accuracy: she had finished. 

“Just as bad,” she said, “and only now I understand: it was the smell of a black 
woman.” 

This happened on a Monday. On Friday at seven o’clock in the evening, Fermina Daza 
sailed away on the regular boat to San Juan de la Ciénaga with only one trunk, in the 
company of her goddaughter, her face covered by a mantilla to avoid questions for 
herself and her husband. Dr. Juvenal Urbino was not at the dock, by mutual agreement, 
following an exhausting three-day discussion in which they decided that she should go to 
Cousin Hildebranda Sanchez’s ranch in Flores de María for as long a time as she needed 
to think before coming to a final decision. Without knowing her reasons, the children 
understood it as a trip she had often put off and that they themselves had wanted her to 
make for a long time. Dr. Urbino arranged matters so that no one in his perfidious circle 
could engage in malicious speculation, and he did it so well that if Florentino Ariza could 
find no clue to Fermina Daza’s disappearance it was because in fact there was none, not 
because he lacked the means to investigate. Her husband had no doubts tha t she would 
come home as soon as she got over her rage. But she left certain that her rage would 
never end. 

However, she was going to learn very soon that her drastic decision was not so much 
the fruit of resentment as of nostalgia. After their honeymoon she had returned several 
times to Europe, despite the ten days at sea, and she had always made the trip with more 
than enough time to enjoy it. She knew the world, she had learned to live and think in 
new ways, but she had never gone back to San Juan de la Ciénaga after the aborted flight 
in the balloon. To her mind there was an element of redemption in the return to Cousin 
Hildebranda’s province, no matter how belated. This was not her response to her marital 
catastrophe: the idea was much older than that. So the mere thought of revisiting her 
adolescent haunts consoled her in her unhappiness. 

When she disembarked with her goddaughter in San Juan de la Ciénaga, she called on 
the great reserves of her character and recognized the town despite all the evidence to the 
contrary. The Civil and Military Commander of the city, who had been advised of her 
arrival, invited her for a drive in the official Victoria while the train was preparing to 
leave for San Pedro Alejandrino, which she wanted to visit in order to see for herself if 
what they said was true, that the bed in which The Liberator had died was as small as a 
child’s. Then Fermina Daza saw her town again in the somnolence of two o’clock in the 
afternoon. She saw the streets that seemed more like beaches with scum-covered pools, 
and she saw the mansions of the Portuguese, with their coats of arms carved over the 
entrance and bronze jalousies at the windows, where the same hesitant, sad piano 
exercises that her recently married mother had taught to the daughters of the wealthy 
houses were repeated without mercy in the gloom of the salons. She saw the deserted 


plaza, with no trees growing in the burning lumps of sodium nitrate, the line of carriages 
with their funereal tops and their horses asleep where they stood, the yellow train to San 
Pedro Alejandrino, and on the corner next to the largest church she saw the biggest and 
most beautiful of the houses, with an arcaded passageway of greenish stone, and its great 
monastery door, and the window of the bedroom where Álvaro would be born many 
years later when she no longer had the memory to remember it. She thought of Aunt 
Escolástica, for whom she continued her hopeless search in heaven and on earth, and 
thinking of her, she found herself thinking of Florentino Ariza with his literary clothes 
and his book of poems under the almond trees in the little park, as she did on rare 
occasions when she recalled her unpleasant days at the Academy. She drove around and 
around, but she could not recognize the old family house, for where she supposed it to be 
she found only a pigsty, and around the corner was a street lined with brothels where 
whores from all over the world took their siestas in the doorways in case there was 
something for them in the mail. It was not the same town. 

When they began their drive, Fermina Daza had covered the lower half of her face with 
her mantilla, not for fear of being recognized in a place where no one could know her but 
because of the dead bodies she saw everywhere, from the railroad station to the cemetery, 
bloating in the sun. The Civil and Military Commander of the city told her: “It’s cholera.” 
She knew it was, because she had seen the white lumps in the mouths of the sweltering 
corpses, but she noted that none of them had the coup de grace in the back of the neck as 
they had at the time of the balloon. 

“That is true,” said the officer. “Even God improves His methods.” 

The distance from San Juan de la Ciénaga to the old plantation of San Pedro 
Alejandrino was only nine leagues, but the yellow train took the entire day to make the 
trip because the engineer was a friend of the regular passengers, who were always asking 
him to please stop so they could stretch their legs by strolling across the golf courses of 
the banana company, and the men bathed naked in the clear cold rivers that rushed down 
from the mountains, and when they were hungry they got off the train to milk the cows 
wandering in the pastures. Fermina Daza was terrified when they reached their 
destination, and she just had time to marvel at the Homeric tamarinds where The 
Liberator had hung his dying man’s hammock and to confirm that the bed where he had 
died, just as they had said, was small not only for so glorious a man but even for a seven-
month-old infant. Another visitor, however, who seemed very well informed, said that the 
bed was a false relic, for the truth was that the father of his country had been left to die on 
the floor. Fermina Daza was so depressed by what she had seen and heard since she left 
her house that for the rest of the trip she took no pleasure in the memory of her earlier 
trip, as she had longed to do, but instead she avoided passing through the villages of her 
nostalgia. In this way she could still keep them, and keep herself from disillusionment. 
She heard the accordions in her detours around disenchantment, she heard the shouts 
from the cockfighting pits, the bursts of gunfire that could just as well signal war as 
revelry, and when she had no other recourse and had to pass through a village, she 
covered her face with her mantilla so that she could remember it as it once had been. 

One night, after so much avoidance of the past, she arrived at Cousin Hildebranda’s 
ranch, and when she saw her waiting at the door she almost fainted: it was as if she were 
seeing herself in the mirror of truth. She was fat and old, burdened with unruly children 
whose father was not the man she still loved without hope but a soldier living on his 


pension whom she had married out of spite and who loved her to distraction. But she was 
still the same person inside her ruined body. Fermina Daza recovered from her shock 
after just a few days of country living and pleasant memories, but she did not leave the 
ranch except to go to Mass on Sundays with the grand children of her wayward 
conspirators of long ago, cowboys on magnificent horses and beautiful, well-dressed girls 
who were just like their mothers at their age and who rode standing in oxcarts and singing 
in chorus until they reached the mission church at the end of the valley. She only passed 
through the village of Flores de María, where she had not gone on her earlier trip because 
she had not thought she would like it, but when she saw it she was fascinated. Her misfortune, 
or the village’s, was that she could never remember it afterward as it was in 
reality, but only as she had imagined it before she had been there. 

Dr. Juvenal Urbino made the decision to come for her after receiving a report from the 
Bishop of Riohacha, who had concluded that his wife’s long stay was caused not by her 
unwillingness to return but by her inability to find a way around her pride. So he went 
without notifying her after an exchange of letters with Hildebranda, in which it was made 
clear that his wife was filled with nostalgia: now she thought only of home. At eleven 
o’clock in the morning, Fermina Daza was in the kitchen preparing stuffed eggplant when 
she heard the shouts of the peons, the neighing of the horses, the shooting of guns into the 
air, then the resolute steps in the courtyard and the man’s voice: 

“It is better to arrive in time than to be invited.” 

She thought she would die of joy. Without time to think about it, she washed her hands 
as well as she could while she murmured: “Thank you, God, thank you, how good you 
are,” thinking that she had not yet bathed because of the damned eggplant that 
Hildebranda had asked her to prepare without telling her who was coming to lunch, 
thinking that she looked so old and ugly and that her face was so raw from the sun that he 
would regret having come when he saw her like this, damn it. But she dried her hands the 
best she could on her apron, arranged her appearance the best she could, called on all the 
haughtiness she had been born with to calm her maddened heart, and went to meet the 
man with her sweet doe’s gait, her head high, her eyes shining, her nose ready for battle, 
and grateful to her fate for the immense relief of going home, but not as pliant as he 
thought, of course, because she would be happy to leave with him, of course, but she was 
also determined to make him pay with her silence for the bitter suffering that had ended 
her life. 

Almost two years after the disappearance of Fermina Daza, an impossible coincidence 
occurred, the sort that Tránsito Ariza would have characterized as one of God’s jokes. 
Florentino Ariza had not been impressed in any special way by the invention of moving 
pictures, but Leona Cassiani took him, unresisting, to the spectacular opening of Cabiria, 
whose reputation was based on the dialogues written by the poet Gabriele D’Annunzio. 
The great open-air patio of Don Galileo Daconte, where on some nights one enjoyed the 
splendor of the stars more than the silent lovemaking on the screen, was filled to 
overflowing with a select public. Leona Cassiani followed the wandering plot with her 
heart in her mouth. Florentino Ariza, on the other hand, was nodding his head in sleep 
because of the overwhelming tedium of the drama. At his back, a woman’s voice seemed 
to read his thoughts: 

“My God, this is longer than sorrow!” 

That was all she said, inhibited perhaps by the resonance of her voice in the darkness, 


for the custom of embellishing silent films with piano accompaniment had not yet been 
established here, and in the darkened enclosure all that one could hear was the projector 
murmuring like rain. Florentino Ariza did not think of God except in the most extreme 
circumstances, but now he thanked Him with all his heart. For even twenty fathoms 
underground he would instantly have recognized the husky voice he had carried in his 
soul ever since the afternoon when he heard her say in a swirl of yellow leaves in a 
solitary park: “Now go, and don’t come back until I tell you to.” He knew that she was 
sitting in the seat behind his, next to her inevitable husband, and he could detect her 
warm, even breathing, and he inhaled with love the air purified by the health of her 
breath. Instead of imagining her under attack by the devouring worms of death, as he had 
in his despondency of recent months, he recalled her at a radiant and joyful age, her belly 
rounded under the Minervan tunic with the seed of her first child. In utter detachment 
from the historical disasters that were crowding the screen, he did not need to turn around 
to see her in his imagination. He delighted in the scent of almonds that came wafting 
back to him from his innermost being, and he longed to know how she thought women in 
films should fall in love so that their loves would cause less pain than they did in life. Just 
before the film ended, he realized in a flash of exultation that he had never been so close, 
so long, to the one he loved so much. 

When the lights went on, he waited for the others to stand up. Then he stood, 
unhurried, and turned around in a distracted way as he buttoned his vest that he always 
opened during a performance, and the four of them found themselves so close to one 
another that they would have been obliged to exchange greetings even if one of them had 
not wanted to. First Juvenal Urbino greeted Leona Cassiani, whom he knew well, and 
then he shook Florentino Ariza’s hand with his customary gallantry. Fermina Daza 
smiled at both of them with courtesy, only courtesy, but in any event with the smile of 
someone who had seen them often, who knew who they were, and who therefore did not 
need an introduction. Leona Cassiani responded with her mulatta grace. But Florentino 
Ariza did not know what to do, because he was flabbergasted at the sight of her. 

She was another person. There was no sign in her face of the terrible disease that was 
in fashion, or of any other illness, and her body had kept the proportion and slenderness 
of her better days, but it was evident that the last two years had been as hard on her as ten 
difficult ones. Her short hair was becoming, with a curved wing on each cheek, but it was 
the color of aluminum, not honey, and behind her grandmother’s spectacles her beautiful 
lanceolate eyes had lost half a lifetime of light. Florentino Ariza saw her move away from 
her husband’s arm in the crowd that was leaving the theater, and he was surprised that 
she was in a public place wearing a poor woman’s mantilla and house slippers. But what 
moved him most was that her husband had to take her arm to help her at the exit, and 
even then she miscalculated the height of the step and almost tripped on the stairs at the 
door. 

Florentino Ariza was very sensitive to the faltering steps of age. Even as a young man 
he would interrupt his reading of poetry in the park to observe elderly couples who 
helped each other across the street, and they were lessons in life that had aided him in 
detecting the laws of his own aging. At Dr. Juvenal Urbino’s time of life, that night at the 
film, men blossomed in a kind of autumnal youth, they seemed more dignified with their 
first gray hairs, they became witty and seductive, above all in the eyes of young women, 
while their withered wives had to clutch at their arms so as not to trip over their own 


shadows. A few years later, however, the husbands fell without warning down the 
precipice of a humiliating aging in body and soul, and then it was their wives who 
recovered and had to lead them by the arm as if they were blind men on charity, whispering 
in their ear, in order not to wound their masculine pride, that they should be careful, 
that there were three steps, not two, that there was a puddle in the middle of the street, 
that the shape lying across the sidewalk was a dead beggar, and with great difficulty 
helped them to cross the street as if it were the only ford across the last of life’s rivers. 
Florentino Ariza had seen himself reflected so often in that mirror that he was never as 
afraid of death as he was of reaching that humiliating age when he would have to be led 
on a woman’s arm. On that day, and only on that day, he knew he would have to 
renounce his hope of Fermina Daza. 

The meeting frightened away sleep. Instead of driving Leona Cassiani in the carriage, 
he walked with her through the old city, where their footsteps echoed like horses’ hooves 
on the cobblestones. From time to time, fragments of fugitive voices escaped through the 
open balconies, bedroom confidences, sobs of love magnified by phantasmal acoustics 
and the hot fragrance of jasmine in the narrow, sleeping streets. Once again Florentino 
Ariza had to summon all his strength not to reveal to Leona Cassiani his repressed love 
for Fermina Daza. They walked together with measured steps, loving each other like 
unhurried old sweethearts, she thinking about the charms of Cabiria and he thinking 
about his own misfortune. A man was singing on a balcony in the Plaza of the 
Customhouse, and his song was repeated throughout the area in a chain of echoes: When I 
was sailing across the immense waves of the sea. On Saints of Stone Street, just when he 
should have said good night at her door, Florentino Ariza asked Leona Cassiani to invite 
him in for a brandy. It was the second time he had made such a request to her under 
comparable circumstances. The first time, ten years before, she had said to him: “If you 
come in at this hour you will have to stay forever.” He did not go in. But he would do so 
now, even if he had to break his word afterward. Nevertheless, Leona Cassiani invited 
him in and asked for no promises. 

That was how he found himself, when he least expected it, in the sanctuary of a love 
that had been extinguished before it was born. Her parents had died, her only brother had 
made his fortune in Curaçao, and she was living alone in the old family house. Years 
before, when he had still not renounced the hope of making her his lover, with the 
consent of her parents Florentino Ariza would visit her on Sundays, and sometimes until 
very late at night, and he had contributed so much to the household that he came to 
consider it his own. But that night after the film he had the feeling that his memory had 
been erased from the drawing room. The furniture had been moved, there were new prints 
hanging on the walls, and he thought that so many heartless changes had been made in 
order to perpetuate the certainty that he had never lived. The cat did not recognize him. 
Dismayed by the cruelty of oblivion, he said: “He does not remember me anymore.” But 
she replied over her shoulder, as she was fixing the brandies, that if he was bothered by 
that he could rest easy, because cats do not remember anyone. 

Leaning back as they sat close together on the sofa, they spoke about themselves, about 
what they had been before they met one afternoon who knows how long ago on the mule-
drawn trolley. Their lives were spent in adjacent offices, and until now they had never 
spoken of anything except their daily work. As they talked, Florentino Ariza put his hand 
on her thigh, he began to caress her with the gentle touch of an experienced seducer, and 


she did not stop him, but she did not respond either, not even with a shudder for 
courtesy’s sake. Only when he tried to go further did she grasp his exploratory hand and 
kiss him on the palm. 

“Behave yourself,” she said. “I realized a long time ago that you are not the man I am 
looking for.” 

While she was still very young, a strong, able man whose face she never saw took her 
by surprise, threw her down on the jetty, ripped her clothes off, and made instantaneous 
and frenetic love to her. Lying there on the rocks, her body covered with cuts and bruises, 
she had wanted that man to stay forever so that she could die of love in his arms. She had 
not seen his face, she had not heard his voice, but she was sure she would have known 
him in a crowd of a thousand men because of his shape and size and his way of making 
love. From that time on, she would say to anyone who would listen to her: “If you ever 
hear of a big, strong fellow who raped a poor black girl from the street on Drowned 
Men’s Jetty, one October fifteenth at about half-past eleven at night, tell him where he 
can find me.” She said it out of habit, and she had said it to so many people that she no 
longer had any hope. Florentino Ariza had heard the story as many times as he had heard 
a boat sailing away in the night. By two o’clock in the morning they had each drunk three 
brandies and he knew, in truth, that he was not the man she was waiting for, and he was 
glad to know it. 

“Bravo, lionlady,” he said when he left. “We have killed the tiger.” 

It was not the only thing that came to an end that night. The evil lie about the pavilion 
of consumptives had ruined his sleep, for it had instilled in him the inconceivable idea 
that Fermina Daza was mortal and as a consequence might die before her husband. But 
when he saw her stumble at the door of the movie theater, by his own volition he took 
another step toward the abyss with the sudden realization that he, and not she, might be 
the one to die first. It was the most fearful kind of presentiment, because it was based on 
reality. The years of immobilized waiting, of hoping for good luck, were behind him, but 
on the horizon he could see nothing more than the unfathomable sea of imaginary 
illnesses, the drop-by-drop urinations of sleepless nights, the daily death at twilight. He 
thought that all the moments in the day, which had once been his allies and sworn 
accomplices, were beginning to conspire against him. A few years before he had gone to 
a dangerous assignation, his heart heavy with terror of what might happen, and he had 
found the door unlocked and the hinges recently oiled so that he could come in witho ut a 
sound, but he repented at the last moment for fear of causing a decent married woman 
irreparable harm by dying in her bed. So that it was reasonable to think that the woman 
he loved most on earth, the one he had waited for from one century to the next without a 
sigh of disenchantment, might not have the opportunity to lead him by the arm across a 
street full of lunar grave mounds and beds of wind blown poppies in order to help him 
reach the other side of death in safety. 

The truth is that by the standards of his time, Florentino Ariza had crossed the line into 
old age. He was fifty-six well-preserved years old, and he thought them well lived 
because they were years of love. But no man of the time would have braved the ridicule 
of looking young at his age, even if he did or thought he did, and none would have dared 
to confess without shame that he still wept in secret over a rebuff received in the previous 
century. It was a bad time for being young: there was a style of dress for each age, but the 
style of old age began soon after adolescence, and lasted until the grave. More than age, it 


was a matter of social dignity. The young men dressed like their grandfathers, they made 
themselves more respectable with premature spectacles, and a walking stick was looked 
upon with favor after the age of thirty. For women there were only two ages: the age for 
marrying, which did not go past twenty-two, and the age for being eternal spinsters: the 
ones left behind. The others, the married women, the mothers, the widows, the 
grandmothers, were a race apart who tallied their age not in relation to the number of 
years they had lived but in relation to the time left to them before they died. 

Florentino Ariza, on the other hand, faced the insidious snares of old age with savage 
temerity, even though he knew that his peculiar fate had been to look like an old man 
from the time he was a boy. At first it was a matter of necessity. Tránsito Ariza pulled 
apart and then sewed together again for him the clothes that his father decided to discard, 
so that he went to primary school wearing frock coats that dragged on the ground when 
he sat down, and ministerial hats that came down over his ears despite the cotton batting 
on the inside to make them smaller. Since he had also worn glasses for myopia from the 
age of five, and had his mother’s Indian hair, as bristly and coarse as horsehair, his 
appearance clarified nothing. It was fortunate that after so much governmental instability 
because of so many superimposed civil wars, academic standards were less selective than 
they had been, and there was a jumble of backgrounds and social positions in the public 
schools. Half-grown children would come to class from the barricades, smelling of 
gunpowder, wearing the insignias and uniforms of rebel officers captured at gunpoint in 
inconclusive battles, and carrying their regulation weapons in full view at their waists. 
They shot each other over disagreements in the playground, they threatened the teachers 
if they received low grades on examinations, and one of them, a third-year student at La 
Salle Academy and a retired colonel in the militia, shot and killed Brother Juan Eremita, 
Prefect of the Community, because he said in catechism class that God was a full-fledged 
member of the Conservative Party. 

On the other hand, the sons of the great ruined families were dressed like old-fashioned 
princes, and some very poor boys went barefoot. Among so many oddities originating in 
so many places, Florentino Ariza was certainly among the oddest, but not to the point of 
attracting undue attention. The harshest thing he heard was when someone shouted to him 
on the street: “When you’re ugly and poor, you can only want more.” In any event, the 
apparel imposed by necessity became, from that time on and for the rest of his life, the 
kind best suited to his enigmatic nature and solemn character. When he was promoted to 
his first important position in the R.C.C., he had clothes made to order in the same style 
as those of his father, whom he recalled as an old man who had died at Christ’s venerable 
age of thirty-three. So that Florentino Ariza always looked much older than he was. As a 
matter of fact, the loose-tongued Brígida Zuleta, a brief love who dished up unwashed 
truths, told him on the very first day that she liked him better without his clothes because 
he looked twenty years younger when he was naked. However, he never knew how to 
remedy that, first because his personal taste would not allow him to dress in any other 
way, and second because at the age of twenty no one knew how to dress like a younger 
man, unless he were to take his short pants and sailor hat out of the closet again. On the 
other hand, he himself could not escape the notion of old age current in his day, so it was 
to be expected that when he saw Fermina Daza stumble at the door of the movie theater 
he would be shaken by a thunderbolt of panic that death, the son of a bitch, would win an 
irreparable victory in his fierce war of love. 


Until that time his greatest battle, fought tooth and nail and lost without glory, was 
against baldness. From the moment he saw the first hairs tangled in his comb, he knew 
that he was condemned to a hell whose torments cannot be imagined by those who do not 
suffer them. He struggled for years. There was not a pomade or lotion he did not try, a 
belief he did not accept, a sacrifice he did not endure, in order to defend every inch of his 
head against the ravages of that devastation. He memorized the agricultural informa tion 
in the Bristol Almanac because he had heard that there was a direct relationship between 
the growth of hair and the harvesting cycles. He left the totally bald barber he had used 
all his life for a foreign newcomer who cut hair only when the moon was in the first 
quarter. The new barber had begun to demonstrate that in fact he had a fertile hand, when 
it was discovered that he was wanted by several Antillean police forces for raping 
novices, and he was taken away in chains. 

By then Florentino Ariza had cut out every advertisement concerning baldness that he 
found in the newspapers of the Caribbean basin, the ones in which they printed two 
pictures of the same man, first as bald as a melon and then with more hair than a lion: 
before and after using the infallible cure. After six years he had tried one hundred 
seventy-two of them, in addition to complementary treatments that appeared on the labels 
of the bottles, and all that he achieved was an itching, foul-smelling eczema of the scalp 
called ringworm borealis by the medicine men of Martinique because it emitted a 
phosphorescent glow in the dark. As a last resort he had recourse to all the herbs that the 
Indians hawked in the public market and to all the magical specifics and Oriental potions 
sold in the Arcade of the Scribes, but by the time he realized that he had been swindled, 
he already had the tonsure of a saint. In the year 1900, while the Civil War of a Thousand 
Days bled the country, an Italian who made custom-fitted wigs of human hair came to the 
city. The wigs cost a fortune, and the manufacturer took no responsibility after three 
months of use, but there were few solvent bald men who did not succumb to the 
temptation. Florentino Ariza was one of the first. He tried on a wig that was so similar to 
his own hair that he was afraid it would stand on end with his changes in mood, but he 
could not accept the idea of wearing a dead man’s hair on his head. His only consolation 
was that his raging baldness meant that he would not have to watch his hair turn gray. 
One day, one of the genial drunks on the river docks embraced him with more enthusiasm 
than usual when he saw him leave the office, and then he removed Florentino Ariza’s hat, 
to the mocking laughter of the stevedores, and gave him a resounding kiss on the head. 

“Hairless wonder!” he shouted. 

That night, at the age of forty-eight, he had the few downy strands left at his temples 
and the nape of his neck cut off, and he embraced with all his heart his destiny of total 
baldness. Every morning before his bath he lathered not only his chin but the areas on his 
scalp where stubble was beginning to reappear, and with a barber’s razor he left 
everything as smooth as a baby’s bottom. Until then he would not remove his hat even in 
the office, for his baldness produced a sensation of nakedness that seemed indecent to 
him. But when he accepted his baldness with all his heart, he attributed to it the 
masculine virtues that he had heard about and scorned as nothing but the fantasies of bald 
men. Later he took refuge in the new custom of combing long hairs from his part on the 
right all the way across his head, and this he never abandoned. But even so, he continued 
to wear his hat, always the same funereal style, even after the tartarita, the local name for 
the straw skimmer, came into fashion. 


The loss of his teeth, on the other hand, did not result from a natural calamity but from 
the shoddy work of an itinerant dentist who decided to eradicate a simple infection by 
drastic means. His terror of the drill had prevented Florentino Ariza from visiting a 
dentist, despite his constant toothaches, until the pain became unbearable. His mother 
was alarmed by a night of inconsolable moaning from the room next to hers, because 
these moans seemed to be the same as the ones from another time, which had almost 
disappeared in the mists of her memory, but when she made him open his mouth to see 
where love was hurting him, she discovered that he had fallen victim to abscesses. 

Uncle Leo XII sent him to Dr. Francis Adonay, a black giant in gaiters and jodhpurs 
who traveled the river boats with complete dental equipment that he carried in a 
steward’s saddlebag, and who seemed to be more like a traveling salesman of terror in the 
villages along the river. With just one glance in his mouth, he decided that Florentino 
Ariza had to have even his healthy teeth and molars extracted in order to protect him once 
and for all from further misfortunes. In contrast to baldness, this radical treatment caused 
him no alarm at all, except for his natural fear of a bloodbath without anesthesia. The idea 
of false teeth did not disturb him either, first because one of his fondest childhood 
memories was of a carnival magician who removed his upper and lower teeth and left 
them chattering by themselves on a table, and second because it would end the toothaches 
that had tormented him, ever since he was a boy, with almost as much cruelty as the pains 
of love. Unlike baldness, it did not seem to him an underhanded attack by old age, 
because he was convinced that despite the bitter breath of vulcanized rubber, his 
appearance would be cleaner with an orthopedic smile. So he submitted without 
resistance to the red-hot forceps of Dr. Adonay, and he endured his convalescence with 
the stoicism of a pack mule. 

Uncle Leo XII attended to the details of the operation as if it were being performed on 
his own flesh. His singular interest in false teeth had developed on one of his first trips 
along the Magdalena River and was the result of his maniacal love for bel canto. One 
night when the moon was full, at the entrance to the port of Gamarra, he made a wager 
with a German surveyor that he could awaken the creatures of the jungle by singing a 
Neapolitan romanza from the Captain’s balustrade. He almost lost the bet. In the river 
darkness one could hear the flapping wings of the cranes in the marshes, the thudding 
tails of the alligators, the terror of the shad as they tried to leap onto dry land, but on the 
final note, when it was feared that the singer would burst his arteries with the power of 
his song, his false teeth dropped out of his mouth with his last breath and fell into the 
water. 

The boat had to wait three days at the port of Tenerife while an emergency set was 
made for him. It was a perfect fit. But on the voyage home, trying to explain to the 
Captain how he had lost the first pair, Uncle Leo XII filled his lungs with the burning air 
of the jungle, sang the highest note he could, held it to his last breath as he tried to 
frighten the alligators that were sunning themselves and watching the passage of the boat 
with unblinking eyes, and the new set of false teeth sank into the current as well. From 
then on, he kept spare sets of teeth everywhere, in various places throughout his house, in 
his desk drawer, and on each of the three company boats. Moreover, when he ate out he 
would carry an extra pair in a cough drop box that he kept in his pocket, because he had 
once broken a pair trying to eat pork cracklings at a picnic. Fearing that his nephew might 
be the victim of similar unpleasant surprises, Uncle Leo XII told Dr. Adonay to make 


him two sets right from the start: one of cheap materials for daily use at the office, and 
the other for Sundays and holidays, with a gold chip in the first molar that would impart a 
touch of realism. At last, on a Palm Sunday ringing with the sound of holiday bells, 
Florentino Ariza returned to the street with a new identity, his perfect smile giving him 
the impression that someone else had taken his place in the world. 

This was at the time that his mother died and Florentino Ariza was left alone in his 
house. It was a haven that suited his way of loving, because the location was discreet 
despite the fact that the numerous windows that gave the street its name made one think 
of too many eyes behind the curtains. But the house had been built to make Fermina 
Daza, and no one but Fermina Daza, happy, so that Florentino Ariza preferred to lose a 
good many opportunities during his most fruitful years rather than soil his house with 
other loves. To his good fortune, every step he climbed in the R.C.C. brought new 
privileges, above all secret privileges, and one of the most practical was the possibility of 
using the offices at night, or on Sundays or holidays, with the complicity of the 
watchmen. Once, when he was First Vice President, he was making emergency love to 
one of the Sunday girls, sitting on a desk chair with her astride him, when the door 
opened without warning. Uncle Leo XII peered in, as if he had walked into the wrong 
office, and stared at his terrified nephew over his eyeglasses. “I’ll be damned!” said his 
uncle, without the least sign of shock. “You screw just like your dad!” And before he 
closed the door, he said, with his eyes looking off into the distance: 

“And you, Señorita, feel free to carry on. I swear by my honor that I have not seen your 
face.” 

The matter was not mentioned again, but the following week it was impossible to work 
in Florentino Ariza’s office. On Monday the electricians burst in to install a rotating fan 
on the ceiling. The locksmiths arrived unannounced and with as much noise as if they 
were going to war, installed a lock on the door so that it could be bolted from the inside. 
The carpenters took measurements without saying why, the upholsterers brought 
swatches of cretonne to see if they matched the color of the walls, and the next week an 
enormous double couch covered in a Dionysian flowered print was delivered through the 
window because it was too big for the doors. They worked at the oddest hours, with an 
impertinence that did not seem unintentional, and they offered the same response to all 
his protests: “Orders from the head office.” Florentino Ariza never knew if this sort of 
interference was a kindness on his uncle’s part or a very personal way of forcing him to 
face up to his abusive behavior. The truth never occurred to him, which was that Uncle 
Leo XII was encouraging his nephew, because he, too, had heard the rumors that his 
habits were different from those of most men, and this obstacle to naming him as his 
successor had caused him great distress. 

Unlike his brother, Leo XII Loayza had enjoyed a stable marriage of sixty years’ 
duration, and he was always proud of not working on Sundays. He had four sons and a 
daughter, and he wanted to prepare all of them as heirs to his empire, but by a series of 
coincidences that were common in the novels of the day, but that no one believed in real 
life, his four sons died, one after the other, as they rose to positions of authority, and his 
daughter had no river vocation whatsoever and preferred to die watching the boats on the 
Hudson from a window fifty meters high. There were even those who accepted as true the 
tale that Florentino Ariza, with his sinister appearance and his vampire’s umbrella, had 
somehow been the cause of all those coincidences. 


When doctor’s orders forced his uncle into retirement, Florentino Ariza began, with 
good grace, to sacrifice some of his Sunday loves. He accompanied his uncle to his 
country retreat in one of the city’s first automobiles, whose crank handle had such a 
powerful recoil that it had dislocated the shoulder of the first driver. They talked for 
many hours, the old man in the hammock with his name embroidered in silk thread, 
removed from everything and with his back to the sea, in the old slave plantation from 
whose terraces, filled with crepe myrtle, one could see the snow-covered peaks of the 
sierra in the afternoon. It had always been difficult for Florentino Ariza and his uncle to 
talk about anything other than river navigation, and it still was on those slow afternoons 
when death was always an unseen guest. One of Uncle Leo XII’s constant preoccupations 
was that river navigation not pass into the hands of entrepreneurs from the interior with 
connections to European corporations. “This has always been a business run by people 
from the coast,” he would say. “If the inlanders get hold of it, they will give it back to the 
Germans.” His preoccupation was consistent with a political conviction that he liked to 
repeat even when it was not to the point. 

“I am almost one hundred years old, and I have seen everything change, even the 
position of the stars in the universe, but I have not seen anything change yet in this 
country,” he would say. “Here they make new constitutions, new laws, new wars every 
three months, but we are still in colonial times.” 

To his brother Masons, who attributed all evils to the failure of federalism, he would 
always reply: “The War of a Thousand Days was lost twenty-three years ago in the war 
of ’76.” Florentino Ariza, whose indifference to politics hovered on the limits of the 
absolute, listened to these increasingly frequent and tiresome speeches as one listens to 
the sound of the sea. But he was a rigorous debater when it came to company policy. In 
opposition to his uncle’s opinion, he thought that the setbacks in river navigation, always 
on the edge of disaster, could be remedied only by a voluntary renunciation of the 
riverboat monopoly that the National Congress had granted to the River Company of the 
Caribbean for ninety-nine years and a day. His uncle protested: “My namesake Leona 
with her worthless anarchist theories has put those ideas in your head.” But that was only 
half true. Florentino Ariza based his thinking on the experience of the German 
commodore Johann B. Elbers, whose noble intelligence had been destroyed by excessive 
personal ambition. His uncle, however, believed that the failure of Elbers was due not to 
privileges but to the unrealistic commitments he had contracted for, which had almost 
been tantamount to his assuming responsibility for the geography of the nation: he had 
taken charge of maintaining the navigability of the river, the port installations, the access 
routes on land, the means of transportation. Besides, he would say, the virulent opposition 
of President Simón Bolívar was no laughing matter. 

Most of his business associates viewed those disputes as if they were matrimonial 
arguments, in which both parties are right. The old man’s obstinacy seemed natural to 
them, not because, as it was too easy to say, old age had made him less visionary than he 
had always been, but because renouncing the monopoly must have seemed to him like 
throwing away the victories of a historic battle that he and his brothers had waged 
unaided, back in heroic times, against powerful adversaries from all over the world. 
Which is why no one opposed him when he kept so tight a hold on his rights that no one 
could touch them before their legal expiration. But suddenly, when Florentino Ariza had 
already surrendered his weapons during those meditative afternoons on the plantation, 


Uncle Leo XII agreed to renounce the centenarian privilege, on the one honorable 
condition that it not take place before his death. 

It was his final act. He did not speak of business again, he did not even allow anyone to 
consult with him, he did not lose a single ringlet from his splendid imperial head or an 
iota of his lucidity, but he did everything possible to keep anyone from seeing him who 
might pity him. He passed the days in contemplation of the perpetual snows from his 
terrace, rocking slowly in a Viennese rocker next to a table where the servants always 
kept a pot of black coffee hot for him, along with a glass of water with boric acid that 
contained two plates of false teeth, which he no longer used except to receive visitors. He 
saw very few friends, and he would speak only of a past so remote that it antedated river 
navigation. But he still had one new topic of conversation left: his desire that Florentino 
Ariza marry. He expressed his wish to him several times, and always in the same way: 

“If I were fifty years younger,” he would say, “I would marry my namesake Leona. I 
cannot imagine a better wife.” 

Florentino Ariza trembled at the idea of his labor of so many years being frustrated at 
the last moment by this unforeseen circumstance. He would have preferred to renounce 
everything, throw it all away, die, rather than fail Fermina Daza. Fortunately, Uncle Leo 
XII did not insist. When he turned ninety-two, he recognized his nephew as sole heir and 
retired from the company. 

Six months later, by unanimous agreement, Florentino Ariza was named President of 
the Board of Directors and General Manager of the company. After the champagne toast 
on the day he took over the post, the old lion in retirement excused himself for speaking 
without getting up from the rocker, and he improvised a brief speech that seemed more 
like an elegy. He said that his life had begun and ended with two providential events. The 
first was that The Liberator had carried him in his arms in the village of Turbaco when he 
was making his ill-fated journey toward death. The other had been finding, despite all the 
obstacles that destiny had interposed, a successor worthy of the company. At last, trying 
to undramatize the drama, he concluded: 

“The only frustration I carry away from this life is that of singing at so many funerals 
except my own.” 

It goes without saying that to close the ceremony he sang the “addio alla vita” from 
Tosca. He sang it a capella, which was the style he preferred, in a voice that was still 
steady. Florentino Ariza was moved, but he showed it only in the slight tremor in his 
voice as he expressed his thanks. In just the same way that he had done and thought 
everything he had done and thought in life, he had scaled the heights only because of his 
fierce determination to be alive and in good health at the moment he would fulfill his 
destiny in the shadow of Fermina Daza. 

However, it was not her memory alone that accompanied him to the party Leona 
Cassiani gave for him that night. The memory of them all was with him: those who slept 
in the cemeteries, thinking of him through the roses he planted over them, as well as 
those who still laid their heads on the pillow where their husbands slept, their horns 
golden in the moonlight. Deprived of one, he wanted to be with them all at the same time, 
which is what he always wanted whenever he was fearful. For even during his most 
difficult times and at his worst moments, he had maintained some link, no matter how 
weak, with his countless lovers of so many years: he always kept track of their lives. 

And so that night he remembered Rosalba, the very first one, who had carried off the 


prize of his virginity and whose memory was still as painful as it had been the first day. 
He had only to close his eyes to see her in her muslin dress and her hat with the long silk 
ribbons, rocking her child’s cage on the deck of the boat. Several times in the course of 
the numerous years of his life he had been ready to set out in search of her, without 
knowing where, or her last name, or if she was the one he was looking for, but certain of 
finding her somewhere among groves of orchids. Each time, because of a real difficulty 
at the last minute or because of an ill-timed failure of his own will, his trip was postponed 
just as they were about to raise the gangplank: always for a reason that had something to 
do with Fermina Daza. 

He remembered the Widow Nazaret, the only one with whom he had profaned his 
mother’s house on the Street of Windows, although it had been Tránsito Ariza and not he 
who had asked her in. He was more understanding of her than of any of the others, 
because she was the only one who radiated enough tenderness to compensate for Fermina 
Daza despite her sluggishness in bed. But she had the inclinations of an alleycat, which 
were more indomitable than the strength of her tenderness, and this meant that both of 
them were condemned to infidelity. Still, they continued to be intermittent lovers for 
almost thirty years, thanks to their musketeers’ motto: Unfaithful but not disloyal. She 
was also the only one for whom Florentino Ariza assumed any responsibility: when he 
heard that she had died and was going to a pauper’s grave, he buried her at his own 
expense and was the only mourner at the funeral. 

He remembered other widows he had loved. He remembered Prudencia Pitre, the oldest 
of those still alive, who was known to everyone as the Widow of Two because she had 
outlived both her husbands. And the other Prudencia, the Widow Arellano, the amorous 
one, who would rip the buttons from his clothes so that he would have to stay in her 
house while she sewed them back on. And Josefa, the Widow Zúñiga, mad with love for 
him, who was ready to cut off his penis with gardening shears while he slept, so that he 
would belong to no one else even if he could not belong to her. 

He remembered Ángeles Alfaro, the most ephemeral and best loved of them all, who 
came for six months to teach string instruments at the Music School and who spent 
moonlit nights with him on the flat roof of her house, as naked as the day she was born, 
playing the most beautiful suites in all music on a cello whose voice became human 
between her golden thighs. From the first moonlit night, both of them broke their hearts 
in the fierce love of inexperience. But Ángeles Alfaro left as she had come, with her 
tender sex and her sinner’s cello, on an ocean liner that flew the flag of oblivion, and all 
that remained of her on the moonlit roofs was a fluttered farewell with a white 
handkerchief like a solitary sad dove on the horizon, as if she were a verse from the 
Poetic Festival. With her Florentino Ariza learned what he had already experienced many 
times without realizing it: that one can be in love with several people at the same time, 
feel the same sorrow with each, and not betray any of them. Alone in the midst of the 
crowd on the pier, he said to himself in a flash of anger: “My heart has more rooms than a 
whorehouse.” He wept copious tears at the grief of parting. But as soon as the ship had 
disappeared over the horizon, the memory of Fermina Daza once again occupied all his 
space. 

He remembered Andrea Varón, outside whose house he had spent the previous week, 
but the orange light in the bathroom had been a warning that he could not go in: someone 
had arrived before him. Someone: man or woman, because Andrea Varón did not hesitate 


over such details when it came to the follies of love. Of all those on the list, she was the 
only one who earned a living with her body, but she did so at her pleasure and without a 
business manager. In her day she had enjoyed a legendary career as a clandestine 
courtesan who deserved her nom de guerre, Our Lady of Everybody. She drove 
governors and admirals mad, she watched eminent heroes of arms and letters who were 
not as illustrious as they believed, and even some who were, as they wept on her 
shoulder. It was true, however, that President Rafael Reyes, after only a hurried half hour 
between appointments in the city, granted her a lifetime pension for distinguished service 
to the Ministry of Finance, where she had never worked a day of her life. She distributed 
her gifts of pleasure as far as her body could reach, and although her indecent conduct 
was public knowledge, no one could have made a definitive case against her, because her 
eminent accomplices gave her the same protection they gave themselves, knowing that 
they had more to lose in a scandal than she did. For her sake Florentino Ariza had 
violated his sacred principle of never paying, and she had violated he rs of never doing it 
free of charge, even with her husband. They had agreed upon a symbolic fee of one peso, 
which she did not take and he did not hand to her, but which they put in the piggy bank 
until enough of them had accumulated to buy something charming from overseas in the 
Arcade of the Scribes. It was she who attributed a distinctive sensuality to the enemas he 
used for his crises of constipation, who convinced him to share them with her, and they 
took them together in the course of their mad afternoons as they tried to create even more 
love within their love. 

He considered it a stroke of good fortune that among so many hazardous encounters, 
the only woman who had made him taste a drop of bitterness was the sinuous Sara 
Noriega, who ended her days in the Divine Shepherdess Asylum, reciting senile verses of 
such outrageous obscenity that they were forced to isolate her so that she would not drive 
the rest of the madwomen crazy. However, when he took over complete responsibility for 
the R.C.C., he no longer had much time or desire to attempt to replace Fermina Daza with 
anyone else: he knew that she was irreplaceable. Little by little he had fallen into the 
routine of visiting the ones who were already established, sleeping with them for as long 
as they pleased him, for as long as he could, for as long as they lived. On the Pentecost 
Sunday when Juvenal Urbino died, he had only one left, only one, who had just turned 
fourteen and had everything that no one else until then had had to make him mad with 
love. 

Her name was América Vicuña. She had arrived two years before from the fishing 
village of Puerto Padre, entrusted by her family to Florentino Ariza as her guardian and 
recognized blood relative. They had sent her with a government scholarship to study 
secondary education, with her petate and her little tin trunk as small as a doll’s, and from 
the moment she walked off the boat, with her high white shoes and her golden braid, he 
had the awful presentiment that they were going to take many Sunday siestas together. 
She was still a child in every sense of the word, with braces on her teeth and the scrapes 
of elementary school on her knees, but he saw right away the kind of woman she was 
soon going to be, and he cultivated her during a slow year of Saturdays at the circus, 
Sundays in the park with ice cream, childish late afternoons, and he won her confidence, 
he won her affection, he led her by the hand, with the gentle astuteness of a kind 
grandfather, toward his secret slaughterhouse. For her it was immediate: the doors of 
heaven opened to her. All at once she burst into flower, which left her floating in a limbo 


of happiness and which motivated her studies, for she was always at the head of her class 
so that she would not lose the privilege of going out on weekends. For him it was the 
most sheltered inlet in the cove of his old age. After so many years of calculated loves, 
the mild pleasure of inno cence had the charm of a restorative perversion. 

They were in full agreement. She behaved like what she was, a girl ready to learn about 
life under the guidance of a venerable old man who was not shocked by anything, and he 
chose to behave like what he had most feared being in his life: a senile lover. He never 
identified her with the young Fermina Daza despite a resemblance that was more than 
casual and was not based only on their age, their school uniform, their braid, their 
untamed walk, and even their haughty and unpredictable character. Moreover, the idea of 
replacement, which had been so effective an inducement for his mendicancy of love, had 
been completely erased from his mind. He liked her for what she was, and he came to 
love her for what she was, in a fever of crepuscular delights. She was the only one with 
whom he took drastic precautions against accidental pregnancy. After half a dozen 
encounters, there was no dream for either of them except their Sunday afternoons. 

Since he was the only person authorized to take her out of the boarding school, he 
would call for her in the six-cylinder Hudson that belonged to the R.C.C., and sometimes 
they would lower the top if the afternoon ,was not sunny and drive along the beach, he 
with his somber hat and she, weak with laughter, holding the sailor hat of her school 
uniform with both hands so that the wind would not blow it off. Someone had told her not 
to spend more time with her guardian than necessary, not to eat anything he had tasted, 
and not to put her face too close to his, for old age was contagious. But she did not care. 
They were both indifferent to what people might think of them because their family 
kinship was well known, and what is more, the extreme difference in their ages placed 
them beyond all suspicion. 

They had just made love on Pentecost Sunday when the bells began to toll at four 
o’clock. Florentino Ariza had to overcome the wild beating of his heart. In his youth, the 
ritual of the tolling bells had been included in the price of the funeral and was denied 
only to the indigent. But after our last war, just at the turn of the century, the 
Conservative regime consolidated its colonial customs, and funeral rites became so 
expensive that only the wealthiest could pay for them. When Archbishop Dante de Luna 
died, bells all over the province tolled unceasingly for nine days and nine nights, and the 
public suffering was so great that his successor reserved the tolling of bells for the funeral 
services of the most illustrious of the dead. Therefore, when Florentino Ariza heard the 
Cathedral bells at four o’clock in the afternoon on a Pentecost Sunday, he felt as if he had 
been visited by a ghost from his lost youth. He never imagined they were the bells he had 
so longed to hear for so many years, ever since the Sunday when he saw Fermina Daza in 
her sixth month of pregnancy as she was leaving High Mass. 

“Damn,” he said in the darkness. “It must be a very big fish for them to ring the 
Cathedral bells.” 

América Vicuña, completely naked, had just awakened. 

“It must be for Pentecost,” she said. 

Florentino Ariza was in no way expert in matters pertaining to the Church, and he had 
not gone to Mass again since he had played the violin in the choir with a German who 
also taught him the science of the telegraph and about whose fate he had never been able 
to obtain any definite news. But he knew beyond any doubt that the bells were not 


ringing for Pentecost. There was public mourning in the city, that was certain, and that is 
what he knew. A delegation of Caribbean refugees had come to his house that morning to 
inform him that Jeremiah de Saint-Amour had been found dead in his photography 
studio. Although Florentino Ariza was not an intimate friend of his, he was close to many 
other refugees who always invited him to their public ceremonies, above all to their 
funerals. But he was sure that the bells were not tolling for Jeremiah de Saint-Amour, 
who was a militant unbeliever and a committed anarchist and who had, moreover, died by 
his own hand. 

“No,” he said, “tolling like that must be for a governor at least.” 

América Vicuña, her pale body dappled by the light coming in through the carelessly 
drawn blinds, was not of an age to think about death. They had made love after lunch and 
they were lying together at the end of their siesta, both of them naked under the ceiling 
fan, whose humming could not hide the sound like falling hail that the buzzards made as 
they walked across the hot tin roof. Florentino Ariza loved her as he had loved so many 
other casual women in his long life, but he loved her with more anguish than any other, 
because he was certain he would be dead by the time she finished secondary school. 

The room resembled a ship’s cabin, its walls made of wooden laths covered by many 
coats of paint, as were the walls of boats, but at four o’clock in the afternoon, even with 
the electric fan hanging over the bed, the heat was more intense than in the riverboat 
cabins because it reflected off the metal roof. It was not so much a formal bedroom as a 
cabin on dry land, which Florentino Ariza had built behind his office in the R.C.C. with 
no other purpose or pretext than to have a nice little refuge for his old man’s loves. On 
ordinary days it was difficult to sleep there, with the shouts of the stevedores, and the 
noise of the cranes from the river harbor, and the enormous bellowing of the ships 
moored at the dock. For the girl, however, it was a Sunday paradise. 

They had planned to be together on Pentecost until she had to return to school, five 
minutes before the Angelus, but the tolling of the bells reminded Florentino Ariza of his 
promise to attend the funeral of Jeremiah de Saint-Amour, and he dressed with more 
haste than usual. First, as always, he plaited her single braid that he himself had loosened 
before they made love, and he sat her on the table to tie the bow on her school shoes, 
which was something she never did well. He helped her without malice, and she helped 
him to help her, as if it were an obligation: after their first encounters they had both lost 
awareness of their ages, and they treated each other with the familiarity of a husband and 
wife who had hidden so many things in this life that there was almost nothing left for 
them to say to each other. 

The offices were closed and dark because of the holiday, and at the deserted dock there 
was only one ship, its boilers damped. The sultry weather presaged the first rains of the 
year, but the transparent air and the Sunday silence in the harbor seemed to belong to a 
more benevolent month. The world was harsher here than in the shadowy cabin, and the 
bells caused greater grief, even if one did not know for whom they tolled. Florentino 
Ariza and the girl went down to the patio of saltpeter, which the Spaniards had used as a 
port for blacks and where there were still the remains of weights and other rusted irons 
from the slave trade. The automobile was waiting for them in the shade of the 
warehouses, and they did not awaken the driver, asleep with his head on the steering 
wheel, until they were settled in their seats. The automobile turned around behind thewarehouses enclosed by chicken wire, crossed the area of the old market on Las Ánimas 


Bay, where near-naked adults were playing ball, and drove out of the river harbor in a 
burning cloud of dust. Florentino Ariza was sure that the funerary honors could not be for 
Jeremiah de Saint-Amour, but the insistent tolling filled him with doubts. He put his hand 
on the driver’s shoulder and asked him, shouting into his ear, for whom the bells tolled. 

“It’s for that doctor with the goatee,” said the driver. “What’s his name?” 

Florentino Ariza did not have to wonder who that was. Nevertheless, when the driver 
told him how he had died, his instantaneous hope vanished because he could not believe 
what he heard. Nothing resembles a person as much as the way he dies, and no death 
could resemble the man he was thinking about less than this one. But it was he, although 
it seemed absurd: the oldest and best-qualified doctor in the city, and one of its illustrious 
men for many other meritorious reasons, had died of a broken spine, at the age of eighty-
one, when he fell from the branch of a mango tree as he tried to catch a parrot. 

All that Florentino Ariza had done since Fermina Daza’s marriage had been based on 
his hope for this event. But now that it had come, he did not feel the thrill of triumph he 
had imagined so often in his sleeplessness. Instead, he was seized by terror: the fantastic 
realization that it could just as well have been himself for whom the death knell was 
tolling. Sitting beside him in the automobile that jolted along the cobbled streets, 
América Vicuña was frightened by his pallor, and she asked him what was the matter. 
Florentino Ariza grasped her hand with his icy one. 

“Oh, my dear,” he sighed, “I would need another fifty years to tell you about it.” 

He forgot Jeremiah de Saint-Amour’s funeral. He left the girl at the door of the school 
with a hurried promise that he would come back for her the following Saturday, and he 
told the driver to take him to the house of Dr. Juvenal Urbino. He was confronted by an 
uproar of automobiles and hired carriages in the surrounding streets and a multitude of 
curious onlookers outside the house. The guests of Dr. Lácides Olivella, who had 
received the bad news at the height of the celebration, came rushing in. It was not easy to 
move inside the house because of the crowd, but Florentino Ariza managed to make his 
way to the master bedroom, peered on tiptoe over the groups of people blocking the door, 
and saw Juvenal Urbino in the conjugal bed as he had wanted to see him since he had 
first heard of him--wallowing in the indignity of death. The carpenter had just taken his 
measurements for the coffin, and at his side, still wearing the dress of a newly-wed 
grandmother that she had put on for the party, Fermina Daza was introspective and 
dejected. 

Florentino Ariza had imagined that moment down to the last detail since the days of his 
youth when he had devoted himself completely to the cause of his reckless love. For her 
sake he had won fame and fortune without too much concern for his methods, for her 
sake he had cared for his health and personal appearance with a rigor that did not seem 
very manly to other men of his time, and he had waited for this day as no one else could 
have waited for anything or anyone in this world: without an instant of discouragement. 
The proof that death had at last interceded on his behalf filled him with the courage he 
needed to repeat his vow of eternal fidelity and everlasting love to Fermina Daza on her-
first night of widowhood. 

He did not deny the accusations of his conscience that it had been a thoughtless and 
inappropriate act, one he had rushed into for fear that the opportunity would never be 
repeated. He would have preferred something less brutal, something in the manner he had 
so often imagined, but fate had given him no choice. He left the house of mourning, full 


of sorrow at leaving her in the same state of upheaval in which he found himself, but 
there was nothing he could have done to prevent it because he felt that this barbarous 
night had been forever inscribed in both their destinies. 

For the next two weeks he did not sleep through a single night. He asked himself in 
despair where Fermina Daza could be without him, what she could be thinking, what she 
would do, in the years of life remaining to her, with the burden of consternation he had 
left in her hands. He suffered a crisis of constipation that swelled his belly like a drum, 
and he had to resort to remedies less pleasant than enemas. The complaints of old age, 
which he endured better than his contemporaries because he had known them since his 
youth, all attacked at the same time. On Wednesday he appeared at the office after a week 
at home, and Leona Cassiani was horrified at seeing him so pale and enervated. But he 
reassured her: it was insomnia again, as always, and once more he bit his tongue to keep 
the truth from pouring out through the bleeding wounds in his heart. The rain did not 
allow him a moment of sun to think in. He spent another unreal week unable to 
concentrate on anything, eating badly and sleeping worse, trying to find the secret signs 
that would show him the road to salvation. But on Friday he was invaded by an 
unreasoning calm, which he interpreted as an omen that nothing new was going to 
happen, that everything he had done in his life had been in vain, that he could not go on: 
it was the end. On Monday, however, when he returned to his house on the Street of 
Windows, he discovered a letter floating in a puddle inside the entrance, and on the wet 
envelope he recognized at once the imperious handwriting that so many changes in life 
had not changed, and he even thought he could detect the nocturnal perfume of withered 
gardenias, because after the initial shock, his heart told him everything: it was the letter 
he had been waiting for, without a moment’s respite, for over half a century. 


CHAPTER SIX 

FERMINA DAZA could not have imagined that her letter, inspired by blind rage, would 
have been interpreted by Florentino Ariza as a love letter. She had put into it all the fury 
of which she was capable, her crudest words, the most wounding, most unjust vilifications, 
which still seemed minuscule to her in light of the enormity of the offense. It was 
the final act in a bitter exorcism through which she was attempting to come to terms with 
her new situation. She wanted to be herself again, to recover all that she had been obliged 
to give up in half a century of servitude that had doubtless made her happy but which, 
once her husband was dead, did not leave her even the vestiges of her identity. She was a 
ghost in a strange house that overnight had become immense and solitary and through 
which she wandered without purpose, asking herself in anguish which of them was 
deader: the man who had died or the woman he had left behind. 

She could not avoid a profound feeling of rancor toward her hus band for having left 
her alone in the middle of the ocean. Everything of his made her cry: his pajamas under 
the pillow, his slippers that had always looked to her like an invalid’s, the memory of his 
image in the back of the mirror as he undressed while she combed her hair before bed, the 
odor of his skin, which was to linger on hers for a long time after his death. She would 
stop in the middle of whatever she was doing and slap herself on the forehead because 
she suddenly remembered something she had forgotten to tell him. At every moment 
countless ordinary questions would come to mind that he alone could answer for her. 
Once he had told her something that she could not imagine: that amputees suffer pains, 
cramps, itches, in the leg that is no longer there. That is how she felt without him, feeling 
his presence where he no longer was. 

When she awoke on her first morning as a widow, she turned over in bed without 
opening her eyes, searching for a more comfortable position so that she could continue 
sleeping, and that was the moment when he died for her. For only then did it become 
clear that he had spent the night away from home for the first time in years. The other 
place where this struck her was at the table, not because she felt alone, which in fact she 
was, but because of her strange belief that she was eating with someone who no longer 
existed. It was not until her daughter Ofelia came from New Orleans with her husband 
and the three girls that she sat at a table again to eat, but instead of the usual one, she 
ordered a smaller, improvised table set up in the corridor. Until then she did not take a 
regular meal. She would walk through the kitchen at any hour, whenever she was hungry, 
and put her fork in the pots and eat a little of everything without placing anything on a 
plate, standing in front of the stove, talking to the serving women, who were the only 
ones with whom she felt comfortable, the ones she got along with best. Still, no matter 
how hard she tried, she could not elude the presence of her dead husband: wherever she 
went, wherever she turned, no matter what she was doing, she would come across 
something of his that would remind her of him. For even though it seemed only decent 
and right to grieve for him, she also wanted to do everything possible not to wallow in 
her grief. And so she made the drastic decision to empty the house of everything that 


would remind her of her dead husband, which was the only way she could think of to go 
on living without him. 

It was a ritual of eradication. Her son agreed to take his library so that she could 
replace his office with the sewing room she had never had when she was married. And 
her daughter would take some furniture and countless objects that she thought were just 
right for the antique auctions in New Orleans. All of this was a relief for Fermina Daza, 
although she was not at all amused to learn that the things she had bought on her 
honeymoon were now relics for antiquarians. To the silent stupefaction of the servants, 
the neighbors, the women friends who came to visit her during that time, she had a bonfire 
built in a vacant lot behind the house, and there she burned everything that reminded 
her of her husband: the most expensive and elegant clothes seen in the city since the last 
century, the finest shoes, the hats that resembled him more than his portraits, the siesta 
rocking chair from which he had arisen for the last time to die, innumerable objects so 
tied to her life that by now they formed part of her identity. She did it without the shadow 
of a doubt, in the full certainty that her husband would have approved, and not only for 
reasons of hygiene. For he had often expressed his desire to be cremated and not shut 
away in the seamless dark of a cedar box. His religion would not permit it, of course: he 
had dared to broach the subject with the Archbishop, just in case, and his answer had 
been a categorical no. It was pure illusion, because the Church did not permit the 
existence of crematoriums in our cemeteries, not even for the use of religions other than 
Catholic, and the advantage of building them would not have occurred to anyone but 
Juvenal Urbino. Fermina Daza did not forget her husband’s terror, and even in the 
confusion of the first hours she remembered to order the carpenter to leave a chink where 
light could come into the coffin as a consolation to him. 

In any event, the holocaust was in vain. In a very short while Fermina Daza realized 
that the memory of her dead husband was as resistant to the fire as it seemed to be to the 
passage of time. Even worse: after the incineration of his clothing, she continued to miss 
not only the many things she had loved in him but also what had most annoyed her: the 
noises he made on arising. That memory helped her to escape the mangrove swamps of 
grief. Above all else, she made the firm decision to go on with her life, remembering her 
husband as if he had not died. She knew that waking each morning would continue to be 
difficult, but it would become less and less so. 

At the end of the third week, in fact, she began to see the first light. But as it grew 
larger and brighter, she became aware that there was an evil phantom in her life who did 
not give her a moment’s peace. He was not the pitiable phantom who had haunted her in 
the Park of the Evangels and whom she had evoked with a certain tenderness after she 
had grown old, but the hateful phantom with his executioner’s frock coat and his hat held 
against his chest, whose thoughtless impertinence had disturbed her so much that she 
found it impossible not to think about him. Ever since her rejection of him at the age of 
eighteen, she had been convinced that she had left behind a seed of hatred in him that 
could only grow larger with time. She had always counted on that hatred, she had felt it 
in the air when the phantom was near, and the mere sight of him had upset and frightened 
her so that she never found a natural way to behave with him. On the night when he 
reiterated his love for her, while the flowers for her dead husband were still perfuming 
the house, she could not believe that his insolence was not the first step in God knows 
what sinister plan for revenge. 


Her persistent memory of him increased her rage. When she awoke thinking about him 
on the day after the funeral, she succeeded in removing him from her thoughts by a 
simple act of will. But the rage always returned, and she realized very soon that the desire 
to forget him was the strongest inducement for remembering him. Then, overcome by 
nostalgia, she dared to recall for the first time the illusory days of that unreal love. She 
tried to remember just how the little park was then, and the shabby almond trees, and the 
bench where he had loved her, because none of it still existed as it had been then. They 
had changed everything, they had removed the trees with their carpet of yellow leaves 
and replaced the statue of the decapitated hero with that of another, who wore his dress 
uniform but had no name or dates or reasons to justify him, and who stood on an 
ostentatious pedestal in which they had installed the electrical controls for the district. 
Her house, sold many years before, had fallen into total ruin at the hands of the Provincial 
Government. It was not easy for her to imagine Florentino Ariza as he had been then, 
much less to believe that the taciturn boy, so vulnerable in the rain, was the moth-eaten 
old wreck who had stood in front of her with no consideration for her situation, or the 
slightest respect for her grief, and had seared her soul with a flaming insult that still made 
it difficult for her to breathe. 

Cousin Hildebranda Sánchez had come to visit a short while after Fermina Daza 
returned from the ranch in Flores de María, where she had gone to recuperate from the 
misfortune of Miss Lynch. Old, fat, and contented, she had arrived in the company of her 
oldest son who, like his father, had been a colonel in the army but had been repudiated by 
him because of his contemptible behavior during the massacre of the banana workers in 
San Juan de la Ciénaga. The two cousins saw each other often and spent endless hours 
feeling nostalgia for the time when they first met. On her last visit, Hildebranda was more 
nostalgic than ever, and very affected by the burden of old age. In order to add even 
greater poignancy to their memories, she had brought her copy of the portrait of them 
dressed as old-fashioned ladies, taken by the Belgian photographer on the afternoon that a 
young Juvenal Urbino had delivered the coup de grace to a willful Fermina Daza. Her 
copy of the photograph had been lost, and Hildebranda’s was almost invisible, but they 
could both recognize themselves through the mists of disenchantment: young and 
beautiful as they would never be again. 

For Hildebranda it was impossible not to speak of Florentino Ariza, because she 
always identified his fate with her own. She evoked him as she evoked the day she had 
sent her first telegram, and she could never erase from her heart the memory of the sad 
little bird condemned to oblivion. For her part, Fermina had often seen him without 
speaking to him, of course, and she could not imagine that he had been her first love. She 
always heard news about him, as sooner or later she heard news about anyone of any 
significance in the city. It was said that he had not married because of his unusual habits, 
but she paid no attention to this, in part because she never paid attention to rumors, and in 
part because such things were said in any event about men who were above suspicion. On 
the other hand, it seemed strange to her that Florentino Ariza would persist in his mystic 
attire and his rare lotions, and that he would continue to be so enigmatic after making his 
way in life in so spectacular and honorable a manner. It was impossible for her to believe 
he was the same person, and she was always surprised when Hildebranda would sigh: 
“Poor man, how he must have suffered!” For she had seen him without grief for a long 
time: a shadow that had been obliterated. 


Nevertheless, on the night she met him in the movie theater just after her return from 
Flores de María, something strange occurred in her heart. She was not surprised that he 
was with a woman, and a black woman at that. What did surprise her was that he was so 
well preserved, that he behaved with the greatest self-assurance, and it did not occur to 
her that perhaps it was she, not he, who had changed after the troubling explosion of Miss 
Lynch in her private life. From then on, and for more than twenty years, she saw him 
with more compassionate eyes. On the night of the vigil for her husband, it not only 
seemed reasonable for him to be there, but she even understood it as the natural end of 
rancor: an act of forgiving and forgetting. That was why she was so taken aback by his 
dramatic reiteration of a love that for her had never existed, at an age when Florentino 
Ariza and she could expect nothing more from life. 

The mortal rage of the first shock remained intact after the symbolic cremation of her 
husband, and it grew and spread as she felt herself less capable of controlling it. Even 
worse: the spaces in her mind where she managed to appease her memories of the dead 
man were slowly but inexorably being taken over by the field of poppies where she had 
buried her memories of Florentino Ariza. And so she thought about him without wanting 
to, and the more she thought about him the angrier she became, and the angrier she 
became the more she thought about him, until it was something so unbearable that her 
mind could no longer contain it. Then she sat down at her dead husband’s desk and wrote 
Florentino Ariza a letter consisting of three irrational pages so full of insults and base 
provocations that it brought her the consolation of consciously committing the vilest act 
of her long life. 

Those weeks had been agonizing for Florentino Ariza as well. The night he reiterated 
his love to Fermina Daza he had wandered aimlessly through streets that had been 
devastated by the afternoon flood, asking himself in terror what he was going to do with 
the skin of the tiger he had just killed after having resisted its attacks for more than half a 
century. The city was in a state of emergency because of the violent rains. In some 
houses, half-naked men and women were trying to salvage whatever God willed from the 
flood, and Florentino Ariza had the impression that everyone’s calamity had something to 
do with his own. But the wind was calm and the stars of the Caribbean were quiet in their 
places. In the sudden silence of other voices, Florentino Ariza recognized the voice of the 
man whom Leona Cassiani and he had heard singing many years before, at the same hour 
and on the same corner: I came back from the bridge bathed in tears. A song that in some 
way, on that night, for him alone, had something to do with death. 

He needed Tránsito Ariza then as he never had before, he needed her wise words, her 
head of a mock queen adorned with paper flowers. He could not avoid it: whenever he 
found himself on the edge of catastrophe, he needed the help of a woman. So that he 
passed by the Normal School, seeking out those who were within reach, and he saw a 
light in the long row of windows in América Vicuña’s dormitory. He had to make a great 
effort not to fall into the grandfather’s madness of carrying her off at two o’clock in the 
morning, warm with sleep in her swaddling clothes and still smelling of the cradle’s 
tantrums. 

At the other end of the city was Leona Cassiani, alone and free and doubtless ready to 
provide him with the compassion he needed at two o’clock in the morning, at three 
o’clock, at any hour and under any circumstances. It would not be the first time he had 
knocked at her door in the wasteland of his sleepless nights, but he knew that she was too 


intelligent, and that they loved each other too much, for him to come crying to her lap 
and not tell her the reason. After a good deal of thought as he sleepwalked through the 
deserted city, it occurred to him that he could do no better than Prudencia Pitre, the 
Widow of Two, who was younger than he. They had first met in the last century, and if 
they stopped meeting it was because she refused to allow anyone to see her as she was, 
half blind and verging on decrepitude. As soon as he thought of her, Florentino Ariza 
returned to the Street of the Windows, put two bottles of port and a jar of pickles in a 
shopping bag, and went to visit her, not even knowing if she was still in her old house, if 
she was alone, or if she was alive. 

Prudencia Pitre had not forgotten his scratching signal at the door, the one he had used 
to identify himself when they thought they were still young although they no longer were, 
and she opened the door without any questions. The street was dark, he was barely visible 
in his black suit, his stiff hat, and his bat’s umbrella hanging over his arm, and her eyes 
were too weak to see him except in full light, but she recognized him by the gleam of the 
streetlamp on the metal frame of his eyeglasses. He looked like a murderer with blood 
still on his hands. 

“Sanctuary for a poor orphan,” he said. 

It was the only thing he could think of to say, just to say something. He was surprised 
at how much she had aged since the last time he saw her, and he was aware that she saw 
him the same way. But he consoled himself by thinking that in a moment, when they had 
both recovered from the initial shock, they would notice fewer and fewer of the blows 
that life had dealt the other, and they would again seem as young as they had been when 
they first met. 

“You look as if you are going to a funeral,” she said. 

It was true. She, along with almost the entire city, had been at the window since eleven 
o’clock, watching the largest and most sumptuous funeral procession that had been seen 
here since the death of Archbishop De Luna. She had been awakened from her siesta by 
the thundering artillery that made the earth tremble, by the dissonances of the marching 
bands, the confusion of funeral hymns over the clamoring bells in all the churches, which 
had been ringing without pause since the previous day. From her balcony she had seen 
the cavalry in dress uniform, the religious communities, the schools, the long black 
limousines of an invisible officialdom, the carriage drawn by horses in feathered 
headdresses and gold trappings, the flag-draped yellow coffin on the gun carriage of a 
historic cannon, and at the very end a line of old open Victorias that kept themselves 
alive in order to carry funeral wreaths. As soon as they had passed by Prudencia Pitre’s 
balcony, a little after midday, the deluge came and the funeral procession dispersed in a 
wild stampede. 

“What an absurd way to die,” she said. 

“Death has no sense of the ridiculous,” he said, and added in sorrow: “above all at our 
age.” 

They were seated on the terrace, facing the open sea, looking at the ringed moon that 
took up half the sky, looking at the colored lights of the boats along the horizon, enjoying 
the mild, perfumed breeze after the storm. They drank port and ate pickles on slices of 
country bread that Prudencia Pitre cut from a loaf in the kitchen. They had spent many 
nights like this after she had been left a widow without children. Florentino Ariza had 
met her at a time when she would have received any man who wanted to be with her, 


even if he were hired by the hour, and they had established a relationship that was more 
serious and longer-lived than would have seemed possible. 

Although she never even hinted at it, she would have sold her soul to the devil to marry 
him. She knew that it would not be easy to submit to his miserliness, or the foolishness of 
his premature appearance of age, or his maniacal sense of order, or his eagerness to ask 
for everything and give nothing at all in return, but despite all this, no man was better 
company because no other man in the world was so in need of love. But no other man 
was as elusive either, so that their love never went beyond the point it always reached for 
him: the point where it would not interfere with his determination to remain free for 
Fermina Daza. Nevertheless, it lasted many years, even after he had arranged for 
Prudencia Pitre to marry a salesman who was home for three months and traveled for the 
next three and with whom she had a daughter and four sons, one of whom, she swore, 
was Florentino Ariza’s. 

They talked, not concerned about the hour, because both were accustomed to sharing 
the sleepless nights of their youth, and they had much less to lose in the sleeplessness of 
old age. Although he almost never had more than two glasses of wine, Florentino Ariza 
still had not caught his breath after the third. He was dripping with perspiration, and the 
Widow of Two told him to take off his jacket, his vest, his trousers, to take off everything 
if he liked, what the hell: after all, they knew each other better naked than dressed. He 
said he would if she did the same, but she refused: some time ago she had looked at 
herself in the wardrobe mirror and suddenly realized that she would no longer have the 
courage to allow anyone--not him, not anyone--to see her undressed. 

Florentino Ariza, in a state of agitation that he could not calm with four glasses of port, 
talked at length about the same subject: the past, the good memories from the past, for he 
was desperate to find the hidden road in the past that would bring him relief. For that was 
what he needed: to let his soul escape through his mouth. When he saw the first light of 
dawn on the horizon, he attempted an indirect approach. He asked, in a way that seemed 
casual: “What would you do if someone proposed marriage to you, just as you are, a 
widow of your age?” She laughed with a wrinkled old woman’s laugh, and asked in turn: 

“Are you speaking of the Widow Urbino?” 

Florentino Ariza always forgot when he should not have that women, and Prudencia 
Pitre more than any other, always think about the hidden meanings of questions more 
than about the questions themselves. Filled with sudden terror because of her chilling 
marksmanship, he slipped through the back door: “I am speaking of you.” She laughed 
again: “Go make fun of your bitch of a mother, may she rest in peace.” Then she urged 
him to say what he meant to say, because she knew that he, or any other man, would not 
have awakened her at three o’clock in the morning after so many years of not seeing her 
just to drink port and eat country bread with pickles. She said: “You do that only “when 
you are looking for someone to cry with.” Florentino Ariza withdrew in defeat. 

“For once you are wrong,” he said. “My reasons tonight have more to do with singing.” 

“Let’s sing, then,” she said. 

And she began to sing, in a very good voice, the song that was popular then: Ramona, I 
cannot live without you. The night was over, for he did not dare to play forbidden games 
with a woman who had proven too many times that she knew the dark side of the moon. 
He walked out into a different city, one that was perfumed by the last dahlias of June, and 
onto a street out of his youth, where the shadowy widows from five o’clock Mass were 


filing by. But now it was he, not they, who crossed the street, so they would not see the 
tears he could no longer hold back, not his midnight tears, as he thought, but other tears: 
the ones he had been swallowing for fifty-one years, nine months and four days. 

He had lost all track of time, and did not know where he was when he awoke facing a 
large, dazzling window. The voice of América Vicuña playing ball in the garden with the 
servant girls brought him back to reality: he was in his mother’s bed. He had kept her 
bedroom intact, and he would sleep there to feel less alone on the few occasions when he 
was troubled by his solitude. Across from the bed hung the large mirror from Don 
Sancho’s Inn, and he had only to see it when he awoke to see Fermina Daza reflected in 
its depths. He knew that it was Saturday, because that was the day the chauffeur picked 
up América Vicuña at her boarding school and brought her back to his house. He realized 
that he had slept without knowing it, dreaming that he could not sleep, in a dream that 
had been disturbed by the wrathful face of Fermina Daza. He bathed, wondering what his 
next step should be, he dressed very slowly in his best clothing, he dabbed on cologne 
and waxed the ends of his white mustache, he left the bedroom, and from the second-
floor hallway he saw the beautiful child in her uniform catching the ball with the grace 
that had made him tremble on so many Saturdays but this morning did not disquiet him in 
the least. He indicated that she should come with him, and before he climbed into the 
automobile he said, although it was not necessary: “Today we are not going to do our 
things.” He took her to the American Ice Cream Shop, filled at this hour with parents 
eating ice cream with their children under the long blades of the fans that hung from the 
smooth ceiling. América Vicuña ordered an enormous glass filled with layers of ice 
cream, each a different color, her favorite dish and the one that was the most popular 
because it gave off an aura of magic. Florentino Ariza drank black coffee and looked at 
the girl without speaking, while she ate the ice cream with a spoon that had a very long 
handle so that one could reach the bottom of the glass. Still looking at her, he said 
without warning: 

“I am going to marry.” 

She looked into his eyes with a flash of uncertainty, her spoon suspended in midair, but 
then she recovered and smiled. 

“That’s a lie,” she said. “Old men don’t marry.” 

That afternoon he left her at her school under a steady downpour just as the Angelus 
was ringing, after the two of them had watched the puppet show in the park, had lunch at 
the fried-fish stands on the jetties, seen the caged animals in the circus that had just come 
to town, bought all kinds of candies at the outdoor stalls to take back to school, and 
driven around the city several times with the top down, so that she could become 
accustomed to the idea that he was her guardian and no longer her lover. On Sunday he 
sent the automobile for her in the event she wanted to take a drive with her friends, but he 
did not want to see her, because since the previous week he had come to full 
consciousness of both their ages. That night he decided to write a letter of apology to 
Fermina Daza, its only purpose to show that he had not given up, but he put it off until 
the next day. On Monday, after exactly three weeks of agony, he walked into his house, 
soaked by the rain, and found her letter. 

It was eight o’clock at night. The two servant girls were in bed, and they had left on the 
light in the hallway that lit Florentino Ariza’s way to his bedroom. He knew that his 
Spartan, bland supper was on the table in the dining room, but the slight hunger he felt 


after so many days of haphazard eating vanished with the emotional upheaval of the 
letter. His hands were shaking so much that it was difficult for him to turn on the 
overhead light in the bedroom. He put the rain-soaked letter on the bed, lit the lamp on 
the night table, and with the feigned tranquillity that was his customary way of calming 
himself, he took off his wet jacket and hung it on the back of the chair, he took off his 
vest, folded it with care, and placed it on top of the jacket, he took off his black silk string 
tie and the celluloid collar that was no longer fashionable in the world, he unbuttoned his 
shirt down to his waist and loosened his belt so that he could breathe with greater ease, 
and at last he took off his hat and put it by the window to dry. Then he began to tremble 
because he did not know where the letter was, and his nervous excitement was so great 
that he was surprised when he found it, for he did not remember placing it on the bed. 
Before opening it, he dried the envelope with his handkerchief, taking care not to smear 
the ink in which his name was written, and as he did so it occurred to him that the secret 
was no longer shared by two people but by three, at least, for whoever had delivered it 
must have noticed that only three weeks after the death of her husband, the Widow 
Urbino was writing to someone who did not belong to her world, and with so much 
urgency that she did not use the regular mails and so much secretiveness that she had 
ordered that it not be handed to anyone but slipped under the door instead, as if it were an 
anonymous letter. He did not have to tear open the envelope, for the water had dissolved 
the glue, but the letter was dry: three closely written pages with no salutation, and signed 
with the initials of her married name. 

He sat on the bed and read it through once as quickly as he could, more intrigued by 
the tone than by the content, and before he reached the second page he knew that it was 
in fact the insulting letter he had expected to receive. He laid it, unfolded, in the light 
shed by the bed-lamp, he took off his shoes and his wet socks, he turned out the overhead 
light, using the switch next to the door, and at last he put on his chamois mustache cover 
and lay down without removing his trousers and shirt, his head supported by two large 
pillows that he used as a backrest for reading. Now he read it again, this time syllable by 
syllable, scrutinizing each so that none of the letter’s secret intentions would be hidden 
from him, and then he read it four more times, until he was so full of the written words 
that they began to lose all meaning. At last he placed it, without the envelope, in the 
drawer of the night table, lay on his back with his hands behind his head, and for four 
hours he did not blink, he hardly breathed, he was more dead than a dead man, as he 
stared into the space in the mirror where she had been. Precisely at midnight he went to 
the kitchen and prepared a thermos of coffee as thick as crude oil, then he took it to his 
room, put his false teeth into the glass of boric acid solution that he always found ready 
for him on the night table, and resumed the posture of a recumbent marble statue, with 
momentary shifts in position when he took a sip of coffee, until the maid came in at six 
o’clock with a fresh thermos. 

Florentino Ariza knew by then what one of his next steps was going to be. In truth, the 
insults caused him no pain, and he was not concerned with rectifying the unjust 
accusations that could have been worse, considering Fermina Daza’s character and the 
gravity of the cause. All that interested him was that the letter, in and of itself, gave him 
the opportunity, and even recognized his right, to respond. Even more: it demanded that 
he respond. So that life was now at the point where he had wanted it to be. Everything 
else depended on him, and he was convinced that his private hell of over half a century’s 


duration would still present him with many mortal challenges, which he was prepared to 
confront with more ardor and more sorrow and more love than he had brought to any of 
them before now, because these would be the last. 

When he went to his office five days after receiving the letter from Fermina Daza, he 
felt as if he were floating in an abrupt and unusual absence of the noise of the typewriters, 
whose sound, like rain, had become less noticeable than silence. It was a moment of 
calm. When the sound began again, Florentino Ariza went to Leona Cas-siani’s office 
and watched her as she sat in front of her own personal typewriter, which responded to 
her fingertips as if it were human. She knew she was being observed, and she looked 
toward the door with her awesome solar smile, but she did not stop typing until the end of 
the paragraph. 

“Tell me something, lionlady of my soul,” asked Florentino Ariza. “How would you 
feel if you received a love letter written on that thing?” 

Her expression--she who was no longer surprised at anything--was one of genuine 
surprise. 

“My God, man!” she exclaimed. “It never occurred to me.” 

For that very reason she could make no other reply. Florentino Ariza had not thought 
of it either until that moment, and he decided to risk it with no reservations. He took one 
of the office typewriters home, his subordinates joking good-naturedly: “You can’t teach 
an old dog new tricks.” Leona Cassiani, enthusiastic about anything new, offered to give 
him typing lessons at home. But he had been opposed to methodical learning ever since 
Lotario Thugut had wanted to teach him to play the violin by reading notes and warned 
him that he would need at least a year to begin, five more to qualify for a professional 
orchestra, and six hours a day for the rest of his life in order to play well. And yet he had 
convinced his mother to buy him a blind man’s violin, and with the five basic rules given 
him by Lotario Thugut, in less than a year he had dared to play in the choir of the 
Cathedral and to serenade Fermina Daza from the paupers’ cemetery according to the 
direction of the winds. If that had been the case at the age of twenty, with something as 
difficult as the violin, he did not see why it could not also be the case at the age of 
seventy-six, with a one-finger instrument like the typewriter. 

He was right. He needed three days to learn the position of the letters on the keyboard, 
another six to learn to think while he typed, and three more to complete the first letter 
without errors after tearing up half a ream of paper. He gave it a solemn salutation-Señora--
and signed it with his initial, as he had done in the perfumed love letters of his 
youth. He mailed it in an envelope with the mourning vignettes that were de rigueur for a 
letter to a recent widow, and with no return address on the back. 

It was a six-page letter, unlike any he had ever written before. It did not have the tone, 
or the style, or the rhetorical air of his early years of love, and his argument was so 
rational and measured that the scent of a gardenia would have been out of place. In a 
certain sense it was his closest approximation to the business letters he had never been 
able to write. Years later, a typed personal letter would be considered almost an insult, 
but at that time the typewriter was still an office animal without its own code of ethics, 
and its domestication for personal use was not foreseen in the books on etiquette. It 
seemed more like bold modernity, which was how Fermina Daza must have understood 
it, for in her second letter to Florentino Ariza, she began by begging his pardon for any 
difficulties in reading her handwriting, since she did not have at her disposal any means 


more advanced than her steel pen. 

Florentino Ariza did not even refer to the terrible letter that she had sent him, but from 
the very beginning he attempted a new method of seduction, without any reference to 
past loves or even to the past itself: a clean slate. Instead, he wrote an extensive 
meditation on life based on his ideas about, and experience of, relations between men and 
women, which at one time he had intended to write as a complement to the Lovers’ 
Companion. Only now he disguised it in the patriarchal style of an old man’s memories 
so that it would not be too obvious that it was really a document of love. First he wrote 
many drafts in his old style, which took longer to read with a cool head than to throw into 
the fire. But he knew that any conventional slip, the slightest nostalgic indiscretion, could 
revive the unpleasant taste of the past in her heart, and although he foresaw her returning 
a hundred letters to him before she dared open the first, he preferred that it not happen 
even once. And so he planned everything down to the last detail, as if it were the final 
battle: new intrigues, new hopes in a woman who had already lived a full and complete 
life. It had to be a mad dream, one that would give her the courage she would need to 
discard the prejudices of a class that had not always been hers but had become hers more 
than anyone’s. It had to teach her to think of love as a state of grace: not the means to 
anything but the alpha and omega, an end in itself. 

He had the good sense not to expect an immediate reply, to be satisfied if the letter was 
not returned to him. It was not, nor were any of the ones that followed, and as the days 
passed, his excitement grew, for the more days that passed without her letters being returned, 
the greater his hope of a reply. In the beginning, the frequency of his letters was 
conditioned by the dexterity of his fingers: first one a week, then two, and at last one a 
day. He was happy about the progress made in the mail service since his days as a 
standard-bearer, for he would not have risked being seen every day in the post office 
mailing a letter to the same person, or sending it with someone who might talk. On the 
other hand, it was very easy to send an employee to buy enough stamps for a month, and 
then slip the letter into one of the three mailboxes located in the old city. He soon made 
that ritual a part of his routine: he took advantage of his insomnia to write, and the next 
day, on his way to the office, he -would ask the driver to stop for a moment at a corner 
box, and he would get out to mail the letter. He never allowed the chauffeur to do it for 
him, as he attempted to do one rainy morning, and at times he took the precaution of carrying 
several letters rather than just one, so that it would seem more natural. The 
chauffeur did not know, of course, that the additional letters were blank pages that 
Florentino Ariza addressed to himself, for he had never carried on a private 
correspondence with anyone, with the exception of the guardian’s report that he sent at 
the end of each month to the parents of América Vicuña, with his personal impressions of 
the girl’s conduct, her state of mind and health, and the progress she was making in her 
studies. 

After the first month he began to number the letters and to head them with a synopsis 
of the previous ones, as in the serialized novels in the newspapers, for fear that Fermina 
Daza would not realize that they had a certain continuity. When they became daily letters, 
moreover, he replaced the envelopes that had mourning vignettes with long white 
envelopes, and this gave them the added impersonality of business letters. When he 
began, he was prepared to subject his patience to a crucial test, at least until he had proof 
that he was wasting his time with the only new approach he could think of. He waited, in 


fact, not with the many kinds of suffering that waiting had caused him in his youth, but 
with the stubbornness of an old man made of stone who had nothing else to think about, 
nothing else to do in a riverboat company that by this time was sailing without his help 
before favorable winds, and who was also convinced that he would be alive and in perfect 
possession of his male faculties the next day, or the day after that, or whenever Fermina 
Daza at last was convinced that there was no other remedy for her solitary widow’s 
yearnings than to lower the drawbridge for him. 

Meanwhile, he continued with his normal life. In anticipation of a favorable reply, he 
began a second renovation of his house so that it would be worthy of the woman who 
could have considered herself its lady and mistress from the day of its purchase. He 
visited Prudencia Pitre again several times, as he had promised, in order to prove to her 
that he loved her despite the devastation wrought by age, loved her in full sunlight and 
with the doors open, and not only on his nights of desolation. He continued to pass by 
Andrea Varón’s house until he found the bathroom light turned off, and he tried to lose 
himself in the wildness of her bed even though it was only so he would not lose the habit 
of love, in keeping with another of his superstitions, not disproved so far, that the body 
carries on for as long as you do. 

His relations with América Vicuña were the only difficulty. He had repeated the order 
to his chauffeur to pick her up on Saturdays at ten o’clock in the morning at the school, 
but he did not know what to do with her during the weekends. For the first time he did 
not concern himself with her, and she resented the change. He placed her in the care of 
the servant girls and had them take her to the afternoon film, to the band concerts in the 
children’s park, to the charity bazaars, or he arranged Sunday activities for her and her 
classmates so that he would not have to take her to the hidden paradise behind his offices, 
to which she had always wanted to return after the first time he took her there. In the fog 
of his new illusion, he did not realize that women can become adults in three days, and 
that three years had gone by since he had met her boat from Puerto Padre. No matter how 
he tried to soften the blow, it was a brutal change for her, and she could not imagine the 
reason for it. On the day in the ice cream parlor when he told her he was going to marry, 
when he revealed the truth to her, she had reeled with panic, but then the possibility 
seemed so absurd that she forgot about it. In a very short while, however, she realized 
that he was behaving with inexplicable evasiveness, as if it was true, as if he were not 
sixty years older than she, but sixty years younger. 

One Saturday afternoon, Florentino Ariza found her trying to type in his bedroom, and 
she was doing rather well, for she was studying typing at school. She had completed 
more than half a page of automatic writing, but it was not difficult to isolate an 
occasional phrase that revealed her state of mind. Florentino Ariza leaned over her 
shoulder to read what she had written. She was disturbed by his man’s heat, by his ragged 
breathing, by the scent on his clothes, which was the same as the scent on his pillow. She 
was no longer the little girl, the newcomer, whom he had undressed, one article of 
clothing at a time, with little baby games: first these little shoes for the little baby bear, 
then this little chemise for the little puppy dog, next these little flowered panties for the 
little bunny rabbit, and a little kiss on her papa’s delicious little dickey-bird. No: now she 
was a full-fledged woman, who liked to take the initiative. She continued typing with just 
one finger of her right hand, and with her left she felt for his leg, explored him, found 
him, felt him come to life, grow, heard him sigh with excitement, and his old man’s 


breathing became uneven and labored. She knew him: from that point on he was going to 
lose control, his speech would become disjointed, he would be at her mercy, and he 
would not find his way back until he had reached the end. She led him by the hand to the 
bed as if he were a blind beggar on the street, and she cut him into pieces with malicious 
tenderness; she added salt to taste, pepper, a clove of garlic, chopped onion, lemon juice, 
bay leaf, until he was seasoned and on the platter, and the oven was heated to the right 
temperature. There was no one in the house. The servant girls had gone out, and the 
masons and carpenters who were renovating the house did not work on Saturdays: they 
had the whole world to themselves. But on the edge of the abyss he came out of his 
ecstasy, moved her hand away, sat up, and said in a tremulous voice: 

“Be careful, we have no rubbers.” 

She lay on her back in bed for a long time, thinking, and when she returned to school 
an hour early she was beyond all desire to cry, and she had sharpened her sense of smell 
along with her claws so that she could track down the miserable whore who had ruined 
her life. Florentino Ariza, on the other hand, made another masculine mis-judgment: he 
believed that she had been convinced of the futility of her desires and had resolved to 
forget him. 

He was back in his element. At the end of six months he had heard nothing at all, and 
he found himself tossing and turning in bed until dawn, lost in the wasteland of a new 
kind of insomnia. He thought that Fermina Daza had opened the first letter because of its 
appearance, had seen the initial she knew from the letters of long ago, and had thrown it 
out to be burned with the rest of the trash without even taking the trouble to tear it up. 
Just seeing the envelopes of those that followed would be enough for her to do the same 
thing without even opening them, and to continue to do so until the end of time, while he 
came at last to his final written meditation. He did not believe that the woman existed 
who could resist her curiosity about half a year of almost daily letters when she did not 
even know the color of ink they were written in, but if such a woman existed, it had to be 
her. 

Florentino Ariza felt that his old age was not a rushing torrent but a bottomless cistern 
where his memory drained away. His ingenuity was wearing thin. After patrolling the 
villa in La Manga for several days, he realized that this strategy from his youth would 
never break down the doors sealed by mourning. One morning, as he was looking for a 
number in the telephone directory, he happened to come across hers. He called. It rang 
many times, and at last he recognized her grave, husky voice: “Hello?” He hung up 
without speaking, but the infinite distance of that unapproachable voice weakened his 
morale. 

It was at this time that Leona Cassiani celebrated her birthday and invited a small 
group of friends to her house. He was distracted and spilled chicken gravy on himself. 
She cleaned his lapel with the corner of his napkin dampened in a glass of water, and then 
she tied it around his neck like a bib to avoid a more serious accident: he looked like an 
old baby. She noticed that several times during dinner he took off his eyeglasses and 
dried them with his handkerchief because his eyes were watering. During coffee he fell 
asleep holding his cup in his hand, and she tried to take it away without waking him, but 
his embarrassed response was: “I was just resting my eyes.” Leona Cassiani went to bed 
astounded at how his age was beginning to show. 

On the first anniversary of the death of Juvenal Urbino, the family sent out invitations 


to a memorial Mass at the Cathedral. Florentino Ariza had still received no reply, and this 
was the driving force behind his bold decision to attend the Mass although he had not 
been invited. It was a social event more ostentatious than emotional. The first few rows 
of pews were reserved for their lifetime owners, whose names were engraved on copper 
nameplates on the backs of their seats. Florentino Ariza was among the first to arrive so 
that he might sit where Fermina Daza could not pass by without seeing him. He thought 
that the best seats would be in the central nave, behind the reserved pews, but there were 
so many people he could not find a seat there either, and he had to sit in the nave for poor 
relations. From there he saw Fermina Daza walk in on her son’s arm, dressed in an 
unadorned long-sleeved black velvet dress buttoned all the way from her neck to the tips 
of her shoes, like a bishop’s cassock, and a narrow scarf of Castilian lace instead of the 
veiled hat worn by other widows, and even by many other ladies who longed for that 
condition. Her uncovered face shone like alabaster, her lanceolate eyes had a life of their 
own under the enormous chandeliers of the central nave, and as she walked she was so 
erect, so haughty, so self-possessed, that she seemed no older than her son. As he stood, 
Florentino Ariza leaned the tips of his fingers against the back of the pew until his 
dizziness passed, for he felt that he and she were not separated by seven paces, but 
existed in two different times. 

Through almost the entire ceremony, Fermina Daza stood in the family pew in front of 
the main altar, as elegant as when she attended the opera. But when it was over, she broke 
with convention and did not stay in her seat, according to the custom of the day, to 
receive the spiritual renewal of condolences, but made her way instead through the crowd 
to thank each one of the guests: an innovative gesture that was very much in harmony 
with her style and character. Greeting one guest after another, she at last reached the 
pews of the poor relations, and then she looked around to make certain she had not 
missed anyone she knew. At that moment Florentino Ariza felt a supernatural wind lifting 
him out of himself: she had seen him. Fermina Daza moved away from her companions 
with the same assurance she brought to everything in society, held out her hand, and with 
a very sweet smile, said to him: 

“Thank you for coming.” 

For she had not only received his letters, she had read them with great interest and had 
found in them serious and thoughtful reasons to go on living. She had been at the table, 
having breakfast with her daughter, when she received the first one. She opened it 
because of the novelty of its being typewritten, and a sudden blush burned her face when 
she recognized the initial of the signature. But she immediately regained her self-
possession and put the letter in her apron pocket. She said: “It is a condolence letter from 
the government.” Her daughter was surprised: “All of them came already.” She was 
imperturbable: “This is another one.” Her intention was to burn the letter later, when she 
was away from her daughter’s questions, but she could not resist the temptation of 
looking it over first. She expected the reply that her insulting letter deserved, a letter that 
she began to regret the very moment she sent it, but from the majestic salutation and the 
subject of the first paragraph, she realized that something had changed in the world. She 
was so intrigued that she locked herself in her bedroom to read it at her ease before she 
burned it, and she read it three times without pausing. 

It was a meditation on life, love, old age, death: ideas that had often fluttered around 
her head like nocturnal birds but dissolved into a trickle of feathers when she tried to 


catch hold of them. There they were, precise, simple, just as she would have liked to say 
them, and once again she grieved that her husband was not alive to discuss them with her 
as they used to discuss certain events of the day before going to sleep. In this way an 
unknown Florentino Ariza was revealed to her, one possessed of a clear-sightedness that 
in no way corresponded to the feverish love letters of his youth or to the somber conduct 
of his entire life. They were, rather, the words of a man who, in the opinion of Aunt 
Escolástica, was inspired by the Holy Spirit, and this thought astounded her now as much 
as it had the first time. In any case, what most calmed her spirit was the certainty that this 
letter from a wise old man was not an attempt to repeat the impertinence of the night of 
the vigil over the body but a very noble way of erasing the past. 

The letters that followed brought her complete calm. Still, she burned them after 
reading them with a growing interest, although burning them left her with a sense of guilt 
that she could not dissipate. So that when they began to be numbered, she found the 
moral justification she had been seeking for not destroying them. At any rate, her initial 
intention was not to keep them for herself but to wait for an opportunity to return them to 
Florentino Ariza so that something that seemed of such great human value would not be 
lost. The difficulty was that time passed and the letters continued to arrive, one every 
three or four days throughout the year, and she did not know how to return them without 
that appearing to be the rebuff she no longer wanted to give, and without having to 
explain everything in a letter that her pride would not permit her to write. 

That first year had been enough time for her to adjust to her widowhood. The purified 
memory of her husband, no longer an obstacle in her daily actions, in her private 
thoughts, in her simplest intentions, became a watchful presence that guided but did not 
hinder her. On the occasions when she truly needed him she would see him, not as an 
apparition but as flesh and blood. She was encouraged by the certainty that he was there, 
still alive but without his masculine whims, his patriarchal demands, his consuming need 
for her to love him in the same ritual of inopportune kisses and tender words with which 
he loved her. For now she understood him better than when he was alive, she understood 
the yearning of his love, the urgent need he felt to find in her the security that seemed to 
be the mainstay of his public life and that in reality he never possessed. One day, at the 
height of desperation, she had shouted at him: “You don’t understand how unhappy I 
am.” Unperturbed, he took off his eyeglasses with a characteristic gesture, he flooded her 
with the transparent waters of his childlike eyes, and in a single phrase he burdened her 
with the weight of his unbearable wisdom: “Always remember that the most important 
thing in a good marriage is not happiness, but stability.” With the first loneliness of her 
widowhood she had understood that the phrase did not conceal the miserable threat that 
she had attributed to it at the time, but was the lodestone that had given them both so 
many happy hours. 

On her many journeys through the world, Fermina Daza had bought every object that 
attracted her attention because of its novelty. She desired these things with a primitive 
impulse that her husband was happy to rationalize, and they were beautiful, useful objects 
as long as they remained in their original environment, in the show windows of Rome, 
Paris, London, or in the New York, vibrating to the Charleston, where skyscrapers were 
beginning to grow, but they could not withstand the test of Strauss waltzes with pork 
cracklings or Poetic Festivals when it was ninety degrees in the shade. And so she would 
return with half a dozen enormous standing trunks made of polished metal, with copper 


locks and corners like decorated coffins, lady and mistress of the world’s latest marvels, 
which were worth their price not in gold but in the fleeting moment when someone from 
her local world would see them for the first time. For that is why they had been bought: 
so that others could see them. She became aware of her frivolous public image long 
before she began to grow old, and in the house she was often heard to say: “We have to 
get rid of all these trinkets; there’s no room to turn around.” Dr. Urbino would laugh at 
her fruitless efforts, for he knew that the emptied spaces were only going to be filled 
again. But she persisted, because it was true that there was no room for anything else and 
nothing anywhere served any purpose, not the shirts hanging on the doorknobs or the 
overcoats for European winters squeezed into the kitchen cupboards. So that on a 
morning when she awoke in high spirits she would raze the clothes closets, empty the 
trunks, tear apart the attics, and wage a war of separation against the piles of clothing that 
had been seen once too often, the hats she had never worn because there had been no 
occasion to wear them while they were still in fashion, the shoes copied by European 
artists from those used by empresses for their coronations, and which were scorned here 
by highborn ladies because they were identical to the ones that black women bought at 
the market to wear in the house. For the entire morning the interior terrace would be in a 
state of crisis, and in the house it would be difficult to breathe because of bitter gusts 
from the mothballs. But in a few hours order would be reestablished because she at last 
took pity on so much silk strewn on the floor, so many leftover brocades and useless 
pieces of passementerie, so many silver fox tails, all condemned to the fire. 

“It is a sin to burn this,” she would say, “when so many people do not even have 
enough to eat.” 

And so the burning was postponed, it was always postponed, and things were only 
shifted from their places of privilege to the stables that had been transformed into storage 
bins for remnants, while the spaces that had been cleared, just as he predicted, began to 
fill up again, to overflow with things that lived for a moment and then went to die in the 
closets: until the next time. She would say: “Someone should invent something to do with 
things you cannot use anymore but that you still cannot throw out.” That was true: she 
was dismayed by the voracity with which objects kept invading living spaces, displacing 
the humans, forcing them back into the corners, until Fermina Daza pushed the objects 
out of sight. For she was not as ordered as people thought, but she did have her own 
desperate method for appearing to be so: she hid the disorder. The day that Juvenal 
Urbino died, they had to empty out half of his study and pile the things in the bedrooms 
so there would be space to lay out the body. 

Death’s passage through the house brought the solution. Once she had burned her 
husband’s clothes, Fermina Daza realized that her hand had not trembled, and on the 
same impulse she continued to light the fire at regular intervals, throwing everything on 
it, old and new, not thinking about the envy of the rich or the vengeance of the poor who 
were dying of hunger. Finally, she had the mango tree cut back at the roots until there 
was nothing left of that misfortune, and she gave the live parrot to the new Museum of 
the City. Only then did she draw a free breath in the kind of house she had always 
dreamed of: large, easy, and all hers. 

Her daughter Ofelia spent three months with her and then returned to New Orleans. 
Her son brought his family to lunch on Sundays and as often as he could during the week. 
Fermina Daza’s closest friends began to visit her once she had overcome the crisis of her 


mourning, they played cards facing the bare patio, they tried out new recipes, they 
brought her up to date on the secret life of the insatiable world that continued to exist 
without her. One of the most faithful was Lucrecia del Real del Obispo, an aristocrat of 
the old school who had always been a good friend and who drew even closer after the 
death of Juvenal Urbino. Stiff with arthritis and repenting her wayward life, in those days 
Lucrecia del Real not only provided her with the best company, she also consulted with 
her regarding the civic and secular projects that were being arranged in the city, and this 
made her feel useful for her own sake and not because of the protective shadow of her 
husband. And yet she was never so closely identified with him as she was then, for she 
was no longer called by her maiden name, and she became known as the Widow Urbino. 

It seemed incredible, but as the first anniversary of her husband’s death approached, 
Fermina Daza felt herself entering a place that was shady, cool, quiet: the grove of the 
irremediable. She was not yet aware, and would not be for several months, of how much 
the written meditations of Florentino Ariza had helped her to recover her peace of mind. 
Applied to her own experiences, they were what allowed her to understand her own life 
and to await the designs of old age with serenity. Their meeting at the memorial Mass 
was a providential opportunity for her to let Florentino Ariza know that she, too, thanks 
to his letters of encouragement, was prepared to erase the past. 

Two days later she received a different kind of letter from him: handwritten on linen 
paper and his complete name inscribed with great clarity on the back of the envelope. It 
was the same ornate ha ndwriting as in his earlier letters, the same will to lyricism, but 
applied to a simple paragraph of gratitude for the courtesy of her greeting in the 
Cathedral. For several days after she read the letter Fermina Daza continued to think 
about it with troubled memories, but with a conscience so clear that on the following 
Thursday she suddenly asked Lucrecia del Real del Obispo if she happened to know 
Florentino Ariza, the, owner of the riverboats. Lucrecia replied that she did: “He seems to 
be a wandering succubus.” She repeated the common gossip that he had never had a 
woman although he was such a good catch, and that he had a secret office where he took 
the boys he pursued at night along the docks. Fermina Daza had heard that story for as 
long as she could remember, and she had never believed it or given it any importance. 
But when she heard it repeated with so much conviction by Lucrecia del Real del Obispo, 
who had also been rumored at one time to have strange tastes, she could not resist the 
urge to clarify matters. She said she had known Florentino Ariza since he was a boy. She 
reminded her that his mother had owned a notions shop on the Street of Windows and 
also bought old shirts and sheets, which she unraveled and sold as bandages during the 
civil wars. And she concluded with conviction: “He is an honorable man, and he is the 
soul of tact.” She was so vehement that Lucrecia took back what she had said: “When all 
is said and done, they also say the same sort of thing about me.” Fermina Daza was not 
curious enough to ask herself why she was making so passionate a defense of a man who 
had been no more than a shadow in her life. She continued to think about him, above all 
when the mail arrived without another letter from him. Two weeks of silence had gone by 
when one of the servant girls woke her during her siesta with a warning whisper: 

“Señora,” she said, “Don Florentino is here.” 

He was there. Fermina Daza’s first reaction was panic. She thought no, he should come 
back another day at a more appropriate ho ur, she was in no condition to receive visitors, 
there was nothing to talk about. But she recovered instantly and told her to show him into 


the drawing room and bring him coffee, while she tidied herself before seeing him. 
Florentino Ariza had waited at the street door, burning under the infernal three o’clock 
sun, but in full control of the situation. He was prepared not to be received, even with an 
amiable excuse, and that certainty kept him calm. But the decisiveness of her message 
shook him to his very marrow, and when he walked into the cool shadows of the drawing 
room he did not have time to think about the miracle he was experiencing because his 
intestines suddenly filled in an explosion of painful foam. He sat down, holding his 
breath, hounded by the damnable memory of the bird droppings on his first love letter, 
and he remained motionless in the shadowy darkness until the first attack of shivering 
had passed, resolved to accept any mishap at that moment except this unjust misfortune. 

He knew himself well: despite his congenital constipation, his belly had betrayed him 
in public three or four times in the course of his many years, and those three or four times 
he had been obliged to give in. Only on those occasions, and on others of equal urgency, 
did he realize the truth of the words that he liked to repeat in jest: “I do not believe in 
God, but I am afraid of Him.” He did not have time for doubts: he tried to say any prayer 
he could remember, but he could not think of a single one. When he was a boy, another 
boy had taught him magic words for hitting a bird with a stone: “Aim, aim, got my aim-if 
I miss you I’m not to blame.” He used it when he went to the country for the first time 
with a new slingshot, and the bird fell down dead. In a confused way he thought that one 
thing had something to do with the other, and he repeated the formula now with the 
fervor of a prayer, but it did not have the desired effect. A twisting in his guts like the coil 
of a spring lifted him from his seat, the foaming in his belly grew thicker and more 
painful, it grumbled a lament and left him covered with icy sweat. The maid who brought 
him the coffee was frightened by his corpse’s face. He sighed: “It’s the heat.” She opened 
the window, thinking she would make him more comfortable, but the afternoon sun hit 
him full in the face and she had to close it again. He knew he could not hold out another 
moment, and then Fermina Daza came in, almost invisible in the darkness, dismayed at 
seeing him in such a state. 

“You can take off your jacket,” she said to him. 

He suffered less from the deadly griping of his bowels than from the thought that she 
might hear them bubbling. But he managed to endure just an instant longer to say no, he 
had only passed by to ask her when he might visit. Still standing, she said to him in confusion: 
“Well, you are here now.” And she invited him to the terrace in the patio, where it 
was cooler. He refused in a voice that seemed to her like a sigh of sorrow. 

“I beg you, let it be tomorrow,” he said. 

She remembered that tomorrow was Thursday, the day when Lucrecia del Real del 
Obispo made her regular visit, but she had the perfect solution: “The day after tomorrow 
at five o’clock.” Florentino Ariza thanked her, bid an urgent farewell with his hat, and 
left without tasting the coffee. She stood in the middle of the drawing room, puzzled, not 
understanding what had just happened, until the sound of his automobile’s backfiring 
faded at the end of the street. Then Florentino Ariza shifted into a less painful position in 
the back seat, closed his eyes, relaxed his muscles, and surrendered to the will of his 
body. It was like being reborn. The driver, who after so many years in his service was no 
longer surprised at anything, remained impassive. But when he opened the door for him 
in front of his house, he said: 

“Be careful, Don Floro, that looks like cholera.” 


But it was only his usual ailment. Florentino Ariza thanked God for that on Friday, at 
five o’clock sharp, when the maid led him through the darkness of the drawing room to 
the terrace in the patio, where he saw Fermina Daza sitting beside a small table set for 
two. She offered him tea, chocolate, or coffee. Florentino Ariza asked for coffee, very hot 
and very strong, and she told the maid: “The usual for me.” The usual was a strong 
infusion of different kinds of Oriental teas, which raised her spirits after her siesta. By the 
time she had emptied the teapot and he the coffeepot, they had both attempted and then 
broken off several topics of conversation, not so much because they were really interested 
in them but in order to avoid others that neither dared to broach. They were both intimidated, 
they could not understand what they were doing so far from their youth on a 
terrace with checkerboard tiles in a house that belonged to no one and that was still 
redolent of cemetery flowers. It was the first time in half a century that they had been so 
close and had enough time to look at each other with some serenity, and they had seen 
each other for what they were: two old people, ambushed by death, who had nothing in 
common except the memory of an ephemeral past that was no longer theirs but belonged 
to two young people who had vanished and who could have been their grandchildren. She 
thought that he would at last be convinced of the unreality of his dream, and that this 
would redeem his insolence. 

In order to avoid uncomfortable silences or undesirable subjects, she asked obvious 
questions about riverboats. It seemed incredible that he, the owner, had only traveled the 
river once, many years ago, before he had anything to do with the company. She did not 
know his reasons, and he would have been willing to sell his soul if he could have told 
them to her. She did not know the river either. Her husband had an aversion to the air of 
the Andes that he concealed with a variety of excuses: the dangers to the heart of the 
altitude, the risks of pneumonia, the duplicity of the people, the injustices of centralism. 
And so they knew half the world, but they did not know their own country. Nowadays 
there was a Junkers seaplane that flew from town to town along the basin of the 
Magdalena like an aluminum grasshopper, with two crew members, six passengers, and 
many sacks of mail. Florentino Ariza commented: “It is like a flying coffin.” She had 
been on the first balloon flight and had experienced no fear, but she could hardly believe 
that she was the same person who had dared such an adventure. She said: “Things have 
changed.” Meaning that she was the one who had changed, and not the means of 
transportation. 

At times the sound of airplanes took her by surprise. She had seen them flying very low 
and performing acrobatic maneuvers on the centenary of the death of The Liberator. One 
of them, as black as an enormous turkey buzzard, grazed the roofs of the houses in La 
Manga, left a piece of wing in a nearby tree, and was caught in the electrical wires. But 
not even that had convinced Fermina Daza of the existence of airplanes. In recent years 
she had not even had the curiosity to go to Manzanillo Bay, where seaplanes landed on 
the water after the police launches had warned away the fishermen’s canoes and the 
growing numbers of recreational boats. Because of her age, she had been chosen to greet 
Charles Lindbergh with a bouquet of roses when he came here on his goodwill flight, and 
she could not understand how a man who was so tall, so blond, so handsome, could go up 
in a contraption that looked as if it were made of corrugated tin and that two mechanics 
had to push by the tail to help lift it off the ground. She just could not get it through her 
head that airplanes not much larger than that one could carry eight people. On the other 


hand, she had heard that the riverboats were a delight because they did not roll like ocean 
liners, although there were other, more serious dangers, such as sandbars and attacks by 
bandits. 

Florentino Ariza explained that those were all legends from another time: these days 
the riverboats had ballrooms and cabins as spacious and luxurious as hotel rooms, with 
private baths and electric fans, and there had been no armed attacks since the last civil 
war. He also explained, with the satisfaction of a personal triumph, that these advances 
were due more than anything else to the freedom of navigation that he had fought for and 
which had stimulated competition: instead of a single company, as in the past, there were 
now three, which were very active and prosperous. Nevertheless, the rapid progress of 
aviation was a real threat to all of them. She tried to console him: boats would always 
exist because there were not many people crazy enough to get into a contraption that 
seemed to go against nature. Then Florentino Ariza spoke of improvements in mail 
service, transportation as well as delivery, in an effort to have her talk about his letters. 
But he was not successful. 

Soon afterward, however, the occasion arose on its own. They had moved far afield of 
the subject when a maid interrupted them to hand Fermina Daza a letter that had just 
arrived by special urban mail, a recent creation that used the same method of distribution 
as telegrams. As always, she could not find her reading glasses. Florentino Ariza 
remained calm. 

“That will not be necessary,” he said. “The letter is mine.” 

And so it was. He had written it the day before, in a terrible state of depression because 
he could not overcome the embarrassment of his first frustrated visit. In it he begged her 
pardon for the impertinence of attempting to visit her without first obtaining her 
permission, and he promised never to return. He had mailed it without thinking, and 
when he did have second thoughts it was too late to retrieve it. But he did not believe so 
many explanations were necessary, and he simply asked Fermina Daza please not to read 
the letter. 

“Of course,” she said. “After all, letters belong to the person who writes them. Don’t 
you agree?” 

He made a bold move. 

“I do,” he said. “That is why they are the first things returned when an affair is ended.” 

She ignored his hidden intentions and returned the letter to him, saying: “It is a shame 
that I cannot read it, because the others have helped me a great deal.” He took a deep 
breath, astounded that she had said so much more than he had hoped for in so 
spontaneous a manner, and he said: “You cannot imagine how happy I am to know that.” 
But she changed the subject, and he could not manage to bring it up again for the rest of 
the afternoon. 

He left well after six o’clock, as they were beginning to turn on the lights in the house. 
He felt more secure but did not have many illusions, because he could not forget Fermina 
Daza’s fickle character and unpredictable reactions at the age of twenty, and he had no 
reason to think that she had changed. Therefore he risked asking, with sincere humility, if 
he might return another day, and once again her reply took him by surprise. 

“Come back whenever you like,” she said. “I am almost always alone.” 

Four days later, on Tuesday, he returned unannounced, and she did not wait for the tea 
to be served to tell him how much his letters had helped her. He said that they were not 


letters in the strict sense of the word, but pages from a book that he would like to write. 
She, too, had understood them in that way. In fact, she had intended to return them, if he 
would not take that as an insult, so that they could be put to better use. She continued 
speaking of how they had helped her during this difficult time, with so much enthusiasm, 
so much gratitude, perhaps with so much affection, that Florentino Ariza risked 
something more than a bold move: it was a somersault. 

“We called each other tú before,” he said. 

It was a forbidden word: “before.” She felt the chimerical angel of the past flying 
overhead, and she tried to elude it. But he went even further: “Before, I mean, in our 
letters.” She was annoyed, and she had to make a serious effort to conceal it. But he 
knew, and he realized that he had to move with more tact, although the blunder showed 
him that her temper was still as short as it had been in her youth although she had learned 
to soften it. 

“I mean,” he said, “that these letters are something very different.” 

“Everything in the world has changed,” she said. 

“I have not,” he said. “Have you?” 

She sat with her second cup of tea halfway to her mouth and rebuked him with eyes 
that had survived so many inclemencies. 

“By now it does not matter,” she said. “I have just turned seventy-two.” 

Florentino Ariza felt the blow in the very center of his heart. He would have liked to 
find a reply as rapid and well aimed as an arrow, but the burden of his age defeated him: 
he had never been so exhausted by so brief a conversation, he felt pain in his heart, and 
each beat echoed with a metallic resonance in his arteries. He felt old, forlorn, useless, 
and his desire to cry was so urgent that he could not speak. They finished their second 
cup in a silence furrowed by presentiments, and when she spoke again it was to ask a 
maid to bring her the folder of letters. He was on the verge of asking her to keep them for 
herself, since he had made carbon copies, but he thought this precaution would seem 
ignoble. There was nothing else to say. Before he left he suggested coming back on the 
following Tuesday at the same time. She asked herself whether she should be so 
acquiescent. 

“I don’t see what sense so many visits would make,” she said. 

“I hadn’t thought they made any sense,” he said. 

And so he returned on Tuesday at five o’clock, and then every Tuesday after that, and 
he ignored the convention of notifying her, because by the end of the second month the 
weekly visits had been incorporated into both their routines. Florentino Ariza brought 
English biscuits for tea, candied chestnuts, Greek olives, little salon delicacies that he 
would find on the ocean liners. One Tuesday he brought her a copy of the picture of her 
and Hildebranda taken by the Belgian photographer more than half a century before, 
which he had bought for fifteen centavos at a postcard sale in the Arcade of the Scribes. 
Fermina Daza could not understand how it had come to be there, and he could only 
understand it as a miracle of love. One morning, as he was cutting roses in his garden, 
Florentino Ariza could not resist the temptation of taking one to her on his next visit. It 
was a difficult problem in the language of flowers because she was a recent widow. A red 
rose, symbol of flaming passion, might offend her mourning. Yellow roses, which in 
another language were the flowers of good fortune, were an expression of jealousy in the 
common vocabulary. He had heard of the black roses of Turkey, which were perhaps the 


most appropriate, but he had not been able to obtain any for acclimatization in his patio. 
After much thought he risked a white rose, which he liked less than the others because it 
was insipid and mute: it did not say anything. At the last minute, in case Fermina Daza 
was suspicious enough to attribute some meaning to it, he removed the thorns. 

It was well received as a gift with no hidden intentions, and the Tuesday ritual was 
enriched, so that when he would arrive with the white rose, the vase filled with water was 
ready in the center of the tea table. One Tuesday, as he placed the rose in the vase, he said 
in an apparently casual manner: 

“In our day it was camellias, not roses.” 

“That is true,” she said, “but the intention was different, and you know it.” 

That is how it always was: he would attempt to move forward, and she would block the 
way. But on this occasion, despite her ready answer, Florentino Ariza realized that he had 
hit the mark, because she had to turn her face so that he would not see her blush. A burning, 
childish blush, with a life of its own and an insolence that turned her vexation on 
herself. Florentino Ariza was very careful to move to other, less offensive topics, but his 
courtesy was so obvious that she knew she had been found out, and that increased her 
anger. It was an evil Tuesday. She was on the point of asking him not to return, but the 
idea of a lovers’ quarrel seemed so ridiculous at their age and in their circumstances that 
it provoked a fit of laughter. The following Tuesday, when Florentino Ariza was placing 
the rose in the vase, she examined her conscience and discovered to her joy that not a 
vestige of resentment was left over from the previous week. 

His visits soon began to acquire an awkward familial amplitude, for Dr. Urbino Daza 
and his wife would sometimes appear as if by accident, and they would stay to play cards. 
Florentino Ariza did not know how to play, but Fermina taught him in just one visit and 
they both sent a written challenge to the Urbino Dazas for the following Tuesday. The 
games were so pleasant for everyone that they soon became as official as his visits, and 
patterns were established for each person’s contribution. Dr. Urbino and his wife, who 
was an excellent confectioner, brought exquisite pastries, a different one each time. 
Florentino Ariza continued to bring delicacies from the European ships, and Fermina 
Daza found a way to contribute a new sur prise each time. They played on the third 
Tuesday of every month, and although they did not wager with money, the loser was 
obliged to contribute something special to the next game. 

There was no difference between Dr. Urbino Daza and his public image: his talents 
were limited, his manner awkward, and he suffered from sudden twitching, caused by 
either happiness or annoyance, and from inopportune blushing, which made one fear for 
his mental fortitude. But it was evident on first meeting him that he was, beyond the 
shadow of a doubt, what Florentino Ariza most feared people would call him: a good 
man. His wife, on the other hand, was vivacious and had a plebeian spark of sharp wit 
that gave a more human note to her elegance. One could not wish for a better couple to 
play cards with, and Florentino Ariza’s insatiable need for love overflowed with the 
illusion of feeling that he was part of a family. 

One night, as they were leaving the house together, Dr. Urbino Daza asked him to have 
lunch with him: “Tomorrow, at twelve-thirty, at the Social Club.” It was an exquisite dish 
served with a poisonous wine: the Social Club reserved the right to refuse admission for 
any number of reasons, and one of the most important was illegitimate birth. Uncle Leo 
XII had experienced great annoyance in this regard, and Florentino Ariza himself had 


suffered the humiliation of being asked to leave when he was already sitting at the table 
as the guest of one of the founding members, for whom Florentino Ariza had performed 
complex favors in the area of river commerce, and who had no other choice but to take 
him elsewhere to eat. 

“Those of us who make the rules have the greatest obligation to abide by them,” he had 
said to him. 

Nevertheless Florentino Ariza took the risk with Dr. Urbino Daza, and he was 
welcomed with special deference, although he was not asked to sign the gold book for 
notable guests. The lunch was brief, there were just the two of them, and its tone was 
subdued. The fears regarding the meeting that had troubled Florentino Ariza since the 
previous afternoon vanished with the port he had as an aperitif. Dr. Urbino Daza wanted 
to talk to him about his mother. Because of everything that he said, Florentino Ariza 
realized that she had spoken to her son about him. And something still more surprising: 
she had lied on his behalf. She told him that they had been childhood friends, playmates 
from the time of her arrival from San Juan de la Ciénaga, and that he had introduced her 
to reading, for which she was forever grateful. She also told him that after school she had 
often spent long hours in the notions shop with Tránsito Ariza, performing prodigious 
feats of embroidery, for she had been a notable teacher, and that if she had not continued 
seeing Florentino Ariza with the same frequency, it had not been through choice but 
because of how their lives had diverged. 

Before he came to the heart of his intentions, Dr. Urbino Daza made several 
digressions on the subject of aging. He thought that the world would make more rapid 
progress without the burden of old people. He said: “Humanity, like armies in the field, 
advances at the speed of the slowest.” He foresaw a more humanitarian and by the same 
token a more civilized future in which men and women would be isolated in marginal 
cities when they could no longer take care of themselves so that they might be spared the 
humiliation, suffering, and frightful loneliness of old age. From the medical point of 
view, according to him, the proper age limit would be seventy. But until they reached that 
degree of charity, the only solution was nursing homes, where the old could console each 
other and share their likes and dislikes, their habits and sorrows, safe from their natural 
disagreements with the younger generation. He said: “Old people, with other old people, 
are not so old.” Well, then: Dr. Urbino Daza wanted to thank Florentino Ariza for the 
good companionship he gave his mother in the solitude of her widowhood, he begged 
him to continue doing so for the good of them both and the convenience of all, and to 
have patience with her senile whims. Florentino Ariza was relieved with the outcome of 
their interview. “Don’t worry,” he said. “I am now four years older than she is, and have 
been since long, long before you were born.” Then he succumbed to the temptation of 
giving vent to his feelings with an ironic barb. 

“In the society of the future,” he concluded, “you would have to visit the cemetery now 
to bring her and me a bouquet of arum lilies for lunch.” 

Until that moment Dr. Urbino Daza had not noticed the inappropriateness of his 
prognostications, and he became enmeshed in a long series of explanations that only 
made matters worse. But Florentino Ariza helped him to extricate himself. He was 
radiant, for he knew that sooner or later he was going to have another meeting like this 
one with Dr. Urbino Daza in order to satisfy an unavoidable social convention: the formal 
request for his mother’s hand in marriage. The lunch had been very encouraging, not only 


in and of itself but because it showed him how simple and well received that inexorable 
request was going to be. If he could have counted on Fermina Daza’s consent, no 
occasion would have been more propitious. Moreover, after their conversation at this 
historic lunch, the formality of a request was almost de trop. 

Even in his youth Florentino Ariza climbed up and down stairs with special care, for he 
had always believed that old age began with one’s first minor fall and that death came 
with the second. The staircase in his offices seemed the most dangerous of all to him because 
it was so steep and narrow, and long before he had to make a special effort not to 
drag his feet, he would climb it with his eyes fixed on each step and both hands clutching 
the banister. It had often been suggested that he replace it with one that was less dangerous, 
but he always put off the decision until next month because he thought it was a 
concession to old age. As the years passed, it took him longer and longer to walk up the 
stairs, not because it was harder for him, as he himself hurried to explain, but because he 
used greater and greater care in the climb. Nevertheless, on the afternoon when he 
returned from lunch with Dr. Urbino Daza, after the aperitif of port and half a glass of red 
wine with the meal, and above all after their triumphal conversation, he tried to reach the 
third stair with so youthful a dance step that he twisted his left ankle, fell backward, and 
only by a miracle did not kill himself. As he was falling he had enough lucidity to think 
that he was not going to die of this accident because the logic of life would not allow two 
men, who had loved the same woman so much for so many years, to die in the same way 
within a year of each other. He was right. He was put into a plaster cast from his foot to 
his calf and forced to remain immobile in bed, but he was livelier than he had been before 
his fall. When the doctor ordered sixty days of convalescence, he could not believe his 
misfortune. 

“Don’t do this to me, Doctor,” he begged. “Two months for me are like ten years for 
you.” 

He tried to get up several times, holding his leg that was like a statue’s, with both 
hands, and reality always defeated him. But when at last he walked again, his ankle still 
painful and his back raw, he had more than enough reasons to believe that destiny had rewarded 
his perseverance with a providential fall. 

The first Monday was his worst day. The pain had eased and the medical prognosis 
was very encouraging, but he refused to accept the fatality of not seeing Fermina Daza 
the following afternoon for the first time in four months. Nevertheless, after a resigned 
siesta, he submitted to reality and wrote her a note excusing himself. He wrote it by hand 
on perfumed paper and in luminous ink so that it could be read in the dark, and with no 
sense of shame he dramatized the gravity of his accident in an effort to arouse her 
compassion. She answered him two days later, very sympathetic, very kind, without one 
word extra, just as in the great days of their love. He seized the opportunity as it flew by 
and wrote to her again. When she answered a second time, he decided to go much further 
than in their coded Tuesday conversations, and he had a telephone installed next to his 
bed on the pretext of keeping an eye on the company’s daily affairs. He asked the 
operator to connect him with the three-digit number that he had known by heart since the 
first time he dialed it. The quiet voice strained by the mystery of distance, the beloved 
voice answered, recognized the other voice, and said goodbye after three conventional 
phrases of greeting. Florentino Ariza was devastated by her indifference: they were back 
at the beginning. 


Two days later, however, he received a letter from Fermina Daza in which she begged 
him not to call again. Her reasons were valid. There were so few telephones in the city 
that all communication took place through an operator who knew all the subscribers, their 
lives, their miracles, and it did not matter if they were not at home: she would find them 
wherever they might be. In return for such efficiency she kept herself informed of their 
conversations, she uncovered the secrets, the best-kept dramas of their private lives, and 
it was not unusual for her to interrupt a conversation in order to express her point of view 
or to calm tempers. Then, too, that year marked the founding of Justice, an evening 
newspaper whose sole purpose was to attack the families with long last names, inherited 
and unencumbered names, which was the publisher’s revenge because his sons had not 
been admitted to the Social Club. Despite her unimpeachable life, Fermina Daza was 
more careful now than ever of everything she said or did, even with her closest friends. 
So that she maintained her connection to Florentino Ariza by means of the anachronistic 
thread of letters. The correspondence back and forth became so frequent and intense that 
he forgot about his leg and the chastisement of the bed, he forgot about everything, and 
he dedicated himself totally to writing on the kind of portable table used in hospitals to 
serve meals to patients. 

They called each other tú again, again they exchanged commentaries on their lives as 
they had done once before in their letters, and again Florentino Ariza tried to mo ve too 
quickly: he wrote her name with the point of a pin on the petals of a camellia and sent it 
to her in a letter. Two days later it was returned with no message. Fermina Daza could 
not help it: all that seemed like children’s games to her, most of all when Florentino 
Ariza insisted on evoking the afternoons of melancholy verses in the Park of the 
Evangels, the letters hidden along her route to school, the embroidery lessons under the 
almond trees. With sorrowing heart she reprimanded him in what appeared to be a casual 
question in the midst of other trivial remarks: “Why do you insist on talking about what 
does not exist?” Later she reproached him for his fruitless insistence on not permitting 
himself to grow old in a natural way. This was, according to her, the reason for his haste 
and constant blundering as he evoked the past. She could not understand how a man 
capable of the thoughts that had given her the strength to endure her widowhood could 
become entangled in so childish a manner when he attempted to apply them to his own 
life. Their roles were reversed. Now it was she who tried to give him new courage to face 
the future, with a phrase that he, in his reckless haste, could not decipher: Let time pass 
and we will see what it brings. For he was never as good a student as she was. His forced 
immobility, the growing lucidity of his conviction that time was fleeting, his mad desire 
to see her, everything proved to him that his fear of falling had been more accurate and 
more tragic than he had foreseen. For the first time, he began to think in a reasoned way 
about the reality of death. 

Leona Cassiani helped him to bathe and to change his pajamas every other day, she 
gave him his enemas, she held the portable urinal for him, she applied arnica compresses 
to the bedsores on his back, she gave him the massages recommended by the doctor so 
that his immobility would not cause other, more severe ailments. On Satur days and 
Sundays she was relieved by América Vicuña, who was to receive her teaching degree in 
December of that year. He had promised to send her to Alabama for further study, at the 
expense of the river company, in part to quiet his conscience and above all in order not to 
face either the reproaches that she did not know how to make to him or the explanations 


that he owed to her. He never imagined how much she suffered during her sleepless 
nights at school, during the weekends without him, during her life without him, because 
he never imagined how much she loved him. He had been informed in an official letter 
from the school that she had fallen from her perpetual first place in the class to last, and 
that she had almost failed her final examinations. But he ignored his duty as guardian: he 
said nothing to América Vicuña’s parents, restrained by a sense of guilt that he tried to 
elude, and he did not discuss it with her because of a well-founded fear that she would try 
to implicate him in her failure. And so he left things as they were. Without realizing it, he 
was beginning to defer his problems in the hope that death would resolve them. 

The two women who took care of him, and Florentino Ariza himself, were surprised at 
how much he had changed. Less than ten years before, he had assaulted one of the maids 
behind the main staircase in the house, dressed and standing as she was, and in less time 
than a Filipino rooster he had left her in a family way. He had to give her a furnished 
house in exchange for her swearing that the author of her dishonor was a part-time, 
Sunday sweetheart who had never even kissed her, and her father and uncles, who were 
proficient sugarcane cutters, forced them to marry. It did not seem possible that this could 
be the same man, this man handled front and back by two women who just a few months 
earlier had made him tremble with love and who now soaped him above his waist and 
below, dried him with towels of Egyptian cotton, and massaged his entire body, while he 
did not emit a single sigh of passion. Each of them had a different explanation for his lack 
of desire. Leona Cassiani thought it was the prelude to death. América Vicuña attributed 
it to a hidden cause whose intricacies she could not decipher. He alone knew the truth, 
and it had its own name. In any case, it was unfair: they suffered more in serving him 
than he did in being so well served. 

Fermina Daza needed no more than three Tuesdays to realize how much she missed 
Florentino Ariza’s visits. She enjoyed the friends who were frequent visitors, and she 
enjoyed them even more as time distanced her from her husband’s habits. Lucrecia del 
Real del Obispo had gone to Panama to have her ear examined because of a pain that 
nothing could ease, and after a month she came back feeling much better, but hearing less 
than she had before and using an ear trumpet. Fermina Daza was the friend who was most 
tolerant of her confusions of questions and answers, and this was so encouraging to 
Lucrecia that hardly a day went by that she did not stop in at any hour. But for Fermina 
Daza no one could take the place of her calming afternoons with Florentino Ariza. 

The memory of the past did not redeem the future, as he insisted on believing. On the 
contrary, it strengthened the conviction that Fermina Daza had always had, that the 
feverish excitement of twenty had been something very noble, very beautiful, but it had 
not been love. Despite her rough honesty she did not intend to disclose that to him, either 
by mail or in person, nor did she have it in her heart to tell him how false the 
sentimentalities of his letters sounded after the miraculous consolation of his written 
meditations, how his lyrical lies cheapened him, how detrimental his maniacal insistence 
on recapturing the past was to his cause. No: not one line of his letters of long ago, not a 
single moment of her own despised youth, had made her feel that Tuesday afternoons 
without him could be as tedious, as lonely, and as repetitious as they really were. 

In one of her attacks of simplification, she had relegated to the stables the radioconsole 
that her husband had given her as an anniversary gift, and which both of them had 
intended to present to the Museum as the first in the city. In the gloom of her mourning 


she had resolved not to use it again, for a widow bearing her family names could not 
listen to any kind of music without offending the memory of the dead, even if she did so 
in private. But after her third solitary Tuesday she had it brought back to the drawing 
room, not to enjoy the sentimental song on the Riobamba station, as she had done before, 
but to fill her idle hours with the soap operas from Santiago de Cuba. It was a good idea, 
for after the birth of her daughter she had begun to lose the habit of reading that her 
husband had inculcated with so much diligence ever since their honeymoon, and with the 
progressive fatigue of her eyes she had stopped altogether, so that months would go by 
without her knowing where she had left her reading glasses. 

She took such a liking to the soap operas from Santiago de Cuba that she waited with 
impatience for each day’s new episode. From time to time she listened to the news to find 
out what was going on in the world, and on the few occasions when she was alone in the 
house she would turn the volume very low and listen to distant, clear merengues from 
Santo Domingo and plenas from Puerto Rico. One night, on an unknown station that 
suddenly came in as strong and clear as if it were next door, she heard heartbreaking 
news: an elderly couple, who for forty years had been repeating their honeymoon every 
year in the same spot, had been murdered, bludgeoned to death with oars by the skipper 
of the boat they were riding in, who then robbed them of all the money they were 
carrying: fourteen dollars. The effect on her was even more devastating when Lucrecia 
del Real told her the complete story, which had been published in a local newspaper. The 
police had discovered that the elderly couple beaten to death were clandestine lovers who 
had taken their vacations together for forty years, but who each had a stable and happy 
marriage as well as very large families. Fermina Daza, who never cried over the soap 
operas on the radio, had to hold back the knot of tears that choked her. In his next letter, 
without any comment, Florentino Ariza sent her the news item that he had cut out of the 
paper. 

These were not the last tears that Fermina Daza was going to hold back. Florentino 
Ariza had not yet finished his sixty days of seclusion when Justice published a front-page 
story, complete with photographs of the two protagonists, about the alleged secret love 
affair between Dr. Juvenal Urbino and Lucrecia del Real del Obispo. There was 
speculation on the details of their relationship, the frequency of their meetings and how 
they were arranged, and the complicity of her husband, who was given to excesses of 
sodomy with the blacks on his sugar plantation. The story, published in enormous block 
letters in an ink the color of blood, fell like a thundering cataclysm on the enfeebled local 
aristocracy. Not a line of it was true: Juvenal Urbino and Lucrecia del Real had been 
close friends in the days when they were both single, and they had continued their 
friendship after their marriages, but they had never been lovers. In any case, it did not 
seem that the purpose of the story was to sully the name of Dr. Juvenal Urbino, whose 
memory enjoyed universal respect, but to injure the husband of Lucrecia del Real, who 
had been elected President of the Social Club the week before. The scandalous story was 
suppressed in a few hours. But Lucrecia del Real did not visit Fermina Daza again, and 
Fermina Daza interpreted this as a confession of guilt. 

It was soon obvious, however, that Fermina Daza was not immune to the hazards of her 
class. Justice attacked her one weak flank: her father’s business. When he was forced into 
exile, she knew of only one instance of his shady dealings, which had been told to her by 
Gala Placidia. Later, when Dr. Urbino confirmed the story after his interview with the 


Governor, she was convinced that her father had been the victim of slander. The facts 
were that two government agents had come to the house on the Park of the Evangels with 
a warrant, searched it from top to bottom without finding what they were looking for, and 
at last ordered the wardrobe with the mirrored doors in Fermina Daza’s old bedroom to 
be opened. Gala Placidia, who was alone in the house and lacked the means to stop 
anyone from doing anything, refused to open it, with the excuse that she did not have the 
keys. Then one of the agents broke the mirror on the door with the butt of his revolver 
and found the space between the glass and the wood stuffed with counterfeit hundred-
dollar bills. This was the last in a chain of clues that led to Lorenzo Daza as the final link 
in a vast international operation. It was a masterful fraud, for the bills had the watermarks 
of the original paper: one-dollar bills had been erased by a chemical process that seemed 
to be magic, and reprinted as hundred-dollar notes. Lorenzo Daza claimed that the 
wardrobe had been purchased long after his daughter’s wedding, and that it must have 
come into the house with the bills already in it, but the police proved that it had been 
there since the days when Fermina Daza had been in school. He was the only one who 
could have hidden the counterfeit fortune behind the mirrors. This was all Dr. Urbino told 
his wife when he promised the Governor that he would send his father-in-law back to his 
own country in order to cover up the scandal. But the newspaper told much more. 

It said that during one of the many civil wars of the last century, Lorenzo Daza had 
been the intermediary between the government of the Liberal President Aquileo Parra and 
one Joseph T. K. Korzeniowski, a native of Poland and a member of the crew of the merchant 
ship Saint Antoine, sailing under the French flag, who had spent several months 
here trying to conclude a complicated arms deal. Korzeniowski, who later became 
famous as Joseph Conrad, made contact somehow with Lorenzo Daza, who bought the 
shipment of arms from him on behalf of the government, with his credentials and his 
receipts in order and the purchase price in gold. According to the story in the newspaper, 
Lorenzo Daza claimed that the arms had been stolen in an improbable raid, and then he 
sold them again, for twice their value, to the Conservatives who were at war with the 
government. 

Justice also said that at the time that General Rafael Reyes founded the navy, Lorenzo 
Daza bought a shipment of surplus boots at a very low price from the English army, and 
with that one deal he doubled his fortune in six months. According to the newspaper, 
when the shipment reached this port, Lorenzo Daza refused to accept it because it 
contained only boots for the right foot, but he was the sole bidder when Customs 
auctioned it according to the law, and he bought it for the token sum of one hundred 
pesos. At the same time, under similar circumstances, an accomplice purchased the 
shipment of boots for the left foot that had reached Riohacha. Once they were in pairs, 
Lorenzo Daza took advantage of his relationship by marriage to the Urbino de la Calle 
family and sold the boots to the new navy at a profit of two thousand percent. 

The story in Justice concluded by saying that Lorenzo Daza did not leave San Juan de 
la Ciénaga at the end of the last century in search of better opportunities for his 
daughter’s future, as he liked to say, but because he had been found out in his prosperous 
business of adulterating imported tobacco with shredded paper, which he did with so 
much skill that not even the most sophisticated smokers noticed the deception. They also 
uncovered his links to a clandestine international enterprise whose most profitable 
business at the end of the last century had been the illegal smuggling of Chinese from 


Panama. On the other hand, his suspect mule trading, which had done so much harm to 
his reputation, seemed to be the only honest business he had ever engaged in. 

When Florentino Ariza left his bed, with his back on fire and carrying a walking stick 
for the first time instead of his umbrella, his first excursion was to Fermina Daza’s house. 
She was like a stranger, ravaged by age, whose resentment had destroyed her desire to 
live. Dr. Urbino Daza, in the two visits he had made to Florentino Ariza during his exile, 
had spoken to him of how disturbed his mother was by the two stories in Justice. The first 
provoked her to such irrational anger at her husband’s infidelity and her friend’s 
disloyalty that she renounced the custom of visiting the family mausoleum one Sunday 
each month, for it infuriated her that he, inside his coffin, could not hear the insults she 
wanted to shout at him: she had a quarrel with a dead man. She let Lucrecia del Real 
know, through anyone who would repeat it to her, that she should take comfort in having 
had at least one real man in the crowd of people who had passed through her bed. As for 
the story about Lorenzo Daza, there was no way to know which affected her more, the 
story itself or her belated discovery of her father’s true character. But one or the other, or 
both, had annihilated her. Her hair, the color of stainless steel, had ennobled her face, but 
now it looked like ragged yellow strands of corn silk, and her beautiful panther eyes did 
not recover their old sparkle even in the brilliant heat of her anger. Her decision not to go 
on living was evident in every gesture. She had long ago given up smoking, whether 
locked in the bathroom or anywhere else, but she took it up again, for the first time in 
public, and with an uncontrolled voracity, at first with cigarettes she rolled herself, as she 
had always liked to do, and then with ordinary ones sold in stores because she no longer 
had time or patience to do it herself. Anyone else would have asked himself what the 
future could hold for a lame old man whose back burned with a burro’s saddle sores and 
a woman who longed for no other happiness but death. But not Florentino Ariza. He 
found a glimmer of hope in the ruins of disaster, for it seemed to him that Fermina Daza’s 
misfortune glorified her, that her anger beautified her, and that her rancor with the world 
had given her back the untamed character she had displayed at the age of twenty. 

She had new reasons for being grateful to Florentino Ariza, because in response to the 
infamous stories, he had written Justice an exemplary letter concerning the ethical 
responsibilities of the press and respect for other people’s honor. They did not publish it, 
but the author sent a copy to the Commercial Daily, the oldest and most serious 
newspaper along the Caribbean coast, which featured the letter on the front page. Signed 
with the pseudonym “Jupiter,” it was so reasoned, incisive, and well written that it was 
attributed to some of the most notable writers in the province. It was a lone voice in the 
middle of the ocean, but it was heard at great depth and great distance. Fermina Daza 
knew who the author was without having to be told, because she recognized some of the 
ideas and even a sentence taken directly from Florentino Ariza’s moral reflections. And 
so she received him with renewed affection in the disarray of her solitude. It was at this 
time that América Vicuña found herself alone one Saturday afternoon in the bedroom on 
the Street of Windows, and without looking for them, by sheer accident, she found the 
typed copies of the meditations of Florentino Ariza and the handwritten letters of 
Fermina Daza, in a wardrobe without a key. 

Dr. Urbino Daza was happy about the resumption of the visits that gave so much 
encouragement to his mother. But Ofelia, his sister, came from New Orleans on the first 
fruit boat as soon as she heard that Fermina Daza had a strange friendship with a man 


whose moral qualifications were not the best. Her alarm grew to critical proportions 
during the first week, when she became aware of the familiarity and self-possession with 
which Florentino Ariza came into the house, and the whispers and fleeting lovers’ 
quarrels that filled their visits until all hours of the night. What for Dr. Urbino Daza was a 
healthy affection between two lonely old people was for her a vice-ridden form of secret 
concubinage. Ofelia Urbino had always been like that, resembling Doña Blanca, her 
paternal grandmother, more than if she had been her daughter. Like her she was 
distinguished, like her she was arrogant, and like her she lived at the mercy of her 
prejudices. Even at the age of five she had been incapable of imagining an innocent 
friendship between a man and a woman, least of all when they were eighty years old. In a 
bitter argument with her brother, she said that all Florentino Ariza needed to do to 
complete his consolation of their mother was to climb into her widow’s bed. Dr. Urbino 
Daza did not have the courage to face her, he had never had the courage to face her, but 
his wife intervened with a serene justification of love at any age. Ofelia lost her temper. 

“Love is ridiculous at our age,” she shouted, “but at theirs it is revolting.” 

She insisted with so much vehemence on her determination to drive Florentino Ariza 
out of the house that it reached Fermina Daza’s ears. She called her to her bedroom, as 
she always did when she wanted to talk without being heard by the servants, and she 
asked her to repeat her accusations. Ofelia did not soften them: she was certain that 
Florentino Ariza, whose reputation as a pervert was known to everyone, was carrying on 
an equivocal relationship that did more harm to the family’s good name than the 
villainies of Lorenzo Daza or the ingenuous adventures of Juvenal Urbino. Fermina Daza 
listened to her without saying a word, without even blinking, but when she finished, 
Fermina Daza was another person: she had come back to life. 

“The only thing that hurts me is that I do not have the strength to give you the beating 
you deserve for being insolent and evil-minded,” she said. “But you will leave this house 
right now, and I swear to you on my mother’s grave that you will not set foot in it again 
as long as I live.” 

There was no power that could dissuade her. Ofelia went to live in her brother’s house, 
and from there she sent all kinds of petitions with distinguished emissaries. But it was in 
vain. Neither the mediation of her son nor the intervention of her friends could break 
Fermina Daza’s resolve. At last, in the colorful language of her better days, she allowed 
herself to confide in her daughter-in-law, with whom she had always maintained a certain 
plebeian camaraderie. “A century ago, life screwed that poor man and me because we 
were too young, and now they want to do the same thing because we are too old.” She lit 
a cigarette with the end of the one she was smoking, and then she gave vent to all the 
poison that was gnawing at her insides. 

“They can all go to hell,” she said. “If we widows have any advantage, it is that there is 
no one left to give us orders.” 

There was nothing to be done. When at last she was convinced that she had no more 
options, Ofelia returned to New Orleans. After much pleading, her mother would only 
agree to say goodbye to her, but she would not allow her in the house: she had sworn on 
her mother’s grave, and for her, during those dark days, that was the only thing left that 
was still pure. 

On one of his early visits, when he was talking about his ships, Florentino Ariza had 
given Fermina Daza a formal invitation to take a pleasure cruise along the river. With one 


more day of traveling by train she could visit the national capital, which they, like most 
Caribbeans of their generation, still called by the name it bore until the last century: Santa 
Fe. But she maintained the prejudices of her husband, and she did not want to visit a cold, 
dismal city where the women did not leave their houses except to attend five o’clock 
Mass and where, she had been told, they could not enter ice cream parlors or public 
offices, and where the funerals disrupted traffic at all hours of the day or night, and where 
it had been drizzling since the year one: worse than in Paris. On the other hand, she felt a 
very strong attraction to the river, she wanted to see the alligators sunning themselves on 
the sandy banks, she wanted to be awakened in the middle of the night by the woman’s 
cry of the manatees, but the idea of so arduous a journey at her age, and a lone widow 
besides, seemed unrealistic to her. 

Florentino Ariza repeated the invitation later on, when she had decided to go on living 
without her husband, and then it had seemed more plausible. But after her quarrel with 
her daughter, embittered by the insults to her father, by her rancor toward her dead 
husband, by her anger at the hypocritical duplicities of Lucrecia del Real, whom she had 
considered her best friend for so many years, she felt herself superfluous in her own 
house. One afternoon, while she was drinking her infusion of worldwide leaves, she 
looked toward the morass of the patio where the tree of her misfortune would never 
bloom again. 

“What I would like is to walk out of this house, and keep going, going, going, and 
never come back,” she said. 

“Take a boat,” said Florentino Ariza. 

Fermina Daza looked at him thoughtfully. 

“Well, I might just do that,” she said. 

A moment before she said it, the thought had not even occurred to her, but all she had 
to do was admit the possibility for it to be considered a reality. Her son and daughter-inlaw 
were delighted when they heard the news. Florentino Ariza hastened to point out that 
on his vessels Fermina Daza would be a guest of honor, she would have a cabin to herself 
which would be just like home, she would enjoy perfect service, and the Captain himself 
would attend to her safety and well-being. He brought route maps to encourage her, 
picture postcards of furious sunsets, poems to the primitive paradise of the Magdalena 
written by illustrious travelers and by those who had become travelers by virtue of the 
poems. She would glance at them when she was in the mood. 

“You do not have to cajole me as if I were a baby,” she told him. “If I go, it will be 
because I have decided to and not because the landscape is interesting.” 

When her son suggested that his wife accompany her, she cut him off abruptly: “I am 
too big to have anyone take care of me.” She herself arranged the details of the trip. She 
felt immense relief at the thought of spending eight days traveling upriver and five on the 
return, with no more than the bare necessities: half a dozen cotton dresses, her toiletries, a 
pair of shoes for embarking and dis embarking, her house slippers for the journey, and 
nothing else: her lifetime dream. 

In January 1824, Commodore Johann Bernard Elbers, the father of river navigation, 
had registered the first steamboat to sail the Magdalena River, a primitive old forty-
horsepower wreck named Fidelity. More than a century later, one seventh of July at six 
o’clock in the evening, Dr. Urbino Daza and his wife accompanied Fermina Daza as she 
boarded the boat that was to carry her on her first river voyage. It was the first vessel 


built in the local shipyards and had been christened New Fidelity in memory of its 
glorious ancestor. Fermina Daza could never believe that so significant a name for them 
both was indeed a historical coincidence and not another conceit born of Florentino 
Ariza’s chronic romanticism. 

In any case, unlike the other riverboats, ancient and modem, New Fidelity boasted a 
suite next to the Captain’s quarters that was spacious and comfortable: a sitting room 
with bamboo furniture covered in festive colors, a double bedroom decorated in Chinese 
motifs, a bathroom with tub and shower, a large, enclosed observa tion deck with hanging 
ferns and an unobstructed view toward the front and both sides of the boat, and a silent 
cooling system that kept out external noises and maintained a climate of perpetual spring. 
These deluxe accommodations, known as the Presidential Suite because three Presidents 
of the Republic had already made the trip in them, had no commercial purpose but were 
reserved for high-ranking officials and very special guests. Florentino Ariza had ordered 
the suite built for that public purpose as soon as he was named President of the R.C.C., 
but his private conviction was that sooner or later it was going to be the joyous refuge of 
his wedding trip with Fermina Daza. 

When in fact the day arrived, she took possession of the Presidential Suite as its lady 
and mistress. The ship’s Captain honored Dr. Urbino Daza and his wife, and Florentino 
Ariza, with champagne and smoked salmon. His name was Diego Samaritano, he wore a 
white linen uniform that was absolutely correct, from the tips of his boots to his cap with 
the R.C.C. insignia embroidered in gold thread, and he possessed, in common with other 
river captains, the stoutness of a ceiba tree, a peremptory voice, and the manners of a 
Florentine cardinal. 

At seven o’clock the first departure warning was sounded, and Fermina Daza felt it 
resonate with a sharp pain in her left ear. The night before, her dreams had been furrowed 
with evil omens that she did not dare to decipher. Very early in the morning she had 
ordered the car to take her to the nearby seminary burial ground, which in those days was 
called La Manga Cemetery, and as she stood in front of his crypt, she made peace with 
her dead husband in a monologue in which she freely recounted all the just recriminations 
she had choked back. Then she told him the details of the trip and said goodbye for now. 
She refused to tell anyone anything except that she was going away, which is what she 
had done whenever she had gone to Europe, in order to avoid exhausting farewells. 
Despite all her travels, she felt as if this were her first trip, and as the day approached her 
agitation increased. Once she was on board she felt abandoned and sad, and she wanted 
to be alone to cry. 

When the final warning sounded, Dr. Urbino Daza and his wife bade her an undramatic 
goodbye, and Florentino Ariza accompanied them to the gangplank. Dr. Urbino Daza 
tried to stand aside so that Florentino Ariza could follow his wife, and only then did he 
realize that Florentino Ariza was also taking the trip. Dr. Urbino Daza could not hide his 
confusion. 

“But we did not discuss this,” he said. 

Florentino Ariza showed him the key to his cabin with too evident an intention: an 
ordinary cabin on the common deck. But to Dr. Urbino Daza this did not seem sufficient 
proof of innocence. He glanced at his wife in consternation, with the eyes of a drowning 
man looking for support, but her eyes were ice. She said in a very low, harsh voice: “You 
too?” Yes: he too, like his sister Ofelia, thought there was an age at which love began to 


be indecent. But he was able to recover in time, and he said goodbye to Florentino Ariza 
with a handshake that was more resigned than grateful. 

From the railing of the salon, Florentino Ariza watched them disembark. Just as he had 
hoped and wished, Dr. Urbino Daza and his wife turned to look at him before climbing 
into their automobile, and he waved his hand in farewell. They both responded in kind. 
He remained at the railing until the automobile disappeared in the dust of the freight yard, 
and then he went to his cabin to change into clothing more suitable for his first dinner on 
board in the Captain’s private dining room. 

It was a splendid evening, which Captain Diego Samaritano seasoned with succulent 
tales of his forty years on the river, but Fermina Daza had to make an enormous effort to 
appear amused. Despite the fact that the final warning had been sounded at eight o’clock, 
when visitors had been obliged to leave and the gangplank had been raised, the boat did 
not set sail until the Captain had finished eating and gone up to the bridge to direct the 
operation. Fermina Daza and Florentino Ariza stayed at the railing, surrounded by noisy 
passengers who made bets on how well they could identify the lights in the city, until the 
boat sailed out of the bay, moved along invisible channels and through swamps spattered 
with the undulating lights of the fishermen, and at last took a deep breath in the open air 
of the Great Magdalena River. Then the band burst into a popular tune, there was a 
joyous stampede of passengers, and in a mad rush, the dancing began. 

Fermina Daza preferred to take refuge in her cabin. She had not said a word for the 
entire evening, and Florentino Ariza allowed her to remain lost in her thoughts. He 
interrupted her only to say good night outside her cabin, but she was not tired, just a little 
chilly, and she suggested that they sit for a while on her private deck to watch the river. 
Florentino Ariza wheeled two wicker easy chairs to the railing, turned off the lights, 
placed a woolen shawl around her shoulders, and sat down beside her. With surprising 
skill, she rolled a cigarette from the little box of tobacco that he had brought her. She 
smoked it slowly, with the lit end inside her mouth, not speaking, and then she rolled 
another two and smoked them one right after the other. Sip by sip, Florentino Ariza drank 
two thermoses of mountain coffee. 

The lights of the city had disappeared over the horizon. Seen from the darkened deck in 
the light of a full moon, the smooth, silent river and the pastureland on either bank 
became a phosphorescent plain. From time to time one could see a straw hut next to the 
great bonfires signaling that wood for the ships’ boilers was on sale. Florentino Ariza still 
had dim memories of the journey of his youth, and in dazzling flashes of lightning the 
sight of the river called them back to life as if they had happened yesterday. He recounted 
some of them to Fermina Daza in the belief that this might animate her, but she sat 
smoking in another world. Florentino Ariza renounced his memories and left her alone 
with hers, and in the meantime he rolled cigarettes and passed them to her already lit, 
until the box was empty. The music stopped after midnight, the voices of the passengers 
dispersed and broke into sleepy whispers, and two hearts, alone in the shadows on the 
deck, were beating in time to the breathing of the ship. 

After a long while, Florentino Ariza looked at Fermina Daza by the light of the river. 
She seemed ghostly, her sculptured profile softened by a tenuous blue light, and he 
realized that she was crying in silence. But instead of consoling her or waiting until all 
her tears had been shed, which is what she wanted, he allowed panic to overcome him. 

“Do you want to be alone?” he asked. 


“If I did, I would not have told you to come in,” she said. 

Then he reached out with two icy fingers in the darkness, felt for the other hand in the 
darkness, and found it waiting for him. Both were lucid enough to realize, at the same 
fleeting instant, that the hands made of old bones were not the hands they had imagined 
before touching. In the next moment, however, they were. She began to speak of her dead 
husband in the present tense, as if he were alive, and Florentino Ariza knew then that for 
her, too, the time had come to ask herself with dignity, with majesty, with an irrepressible 
desire to live, what she should do with the love that had been left behind without a 
master. 

Fermina Daza stopped smoking in order not to let go of the hand that was still in hers. 
She was lost in her longing to understand. She could not conceive of a husband better 
than hers had been, and yet whe n she recalled their life she found more difficulties than 
pleasures, too many mutual misunderstandings, useless arguments, unresolved angers. 
Suddenly she sighed: “It is incredible how one can be happy for so many years in the 
midst of so many squabbles, so many problems, damn it, and not really know if it was 
love or not.” By the time she finished unburdening herself, someone had turned off the 
moon. The boat moved ahead at its steady pace, one foot in front of the other: an 
immense, watchful animal. Fermina Daza had returned from her longing. 

“Go now,” she said. 

Florentino Ariza pressed her hand, bent toward her, and tried to kiss her on the cheek. 
But she refused, in her hoarse, soft voice. 

“Not now,” she said to him. “I smell like an old woman.” 

She heard him leave in the darkness, she heard his steps on the stairs, she heard him 
cease to exist until the next day. Fermina Daza lit another cigarette, and as she smoked 
she saw Dr. Juvenal Urbino in his immaculate linen suit, with his professional rigor, his 
dazzling charm, his official love, and he tipped his white hat in a gesture of farewell from 
another boat out of the past. “We men are the miserable slaves of prejudice,” he had once 
said to her. “But when a woman decides to sleep with a man, there is no wall she will not 
scale, no fortress she will not destroy, no moral consideration she will not ignore at its 
very root: there is no God worth worrying about.” Fermina Daza sat motionless until 
dawn, thinking about Florentino Ariza, not as the desolate sentinel in the little Park of the 
Evangels, whose memory did not awaken even a spark of nostalgia in her, but as he was 
now, old and lame, but real: the man who had always been within reach and whom she 
could never acknowledge. As the breathing boat carried her toward the splendor of the 
day’s first roses, all that she asked of God was that Florentino Ariza would know how to 
begin again the next day. 

He did. Fermina Daza instructed the steward to let her sleep as long as she wanted, and 
when she awoke there was a vase on the night table with a fresh white rose, drops of dew 
still on it, as well as a letter from Florentino Ariza with as many pages as he had written 
since his farewell to her. It was a calm letter that did not attempt to do more than express 
the state of mind that had held him captive since the previous night: it was as lyrical as 
the others, as rhetorical as all of them, but it had a foundation in reality. Fermina Daza 
read it with some embarrassment because of the shameless racing of her heart. It 
concluded with the request that she advise the steward when she was ready, for the 
Captain was waiting on the bridge to show them the operation of the ship. 

She was ready at eleven o’clock, bathed and smelling of flower-scented soap, wearing 


a very simple widow’s dress of gray etamine, and completely recovered from the night’s 
turmoil. She ordered a sober breakfast from the steward, who was dressed in impeccable 
white, and in the Captain’s personal service, but she did not send a message for anyone to 
come for her. She went up alone, dazzled by the cloudless sky, and she found Florentino 
Ariza talking to the Captain on the bridge. He looked different to her, not only because 
she saw him now with other eyes, but because in reality he had changed. Instead of the 
funereal clothing he had worn all his life, he was dressed in comfortable white shoes, 
slacks, and a linen shirt with an open collar, short sleeves, and his monogram 
embroidered on the breast pocket. He also had on a white Scottish cap and removable 
dark lenses over his perpetual eyeglasses for myopia. It was evident that everything was 
being used for the first time and had been bought just for the trip, with the exception of 
the well-worn belt of dark brown leather, which Fermina Daza noticed at first glance as if 
it were a fly in the soup. Seeing him like this, dressed just for her in so patent a manner, 
she could not hold back the fiery blush that rose to her face. She was embarrassed when 
she greeted him, and he was more embarrassed by her embarrassment. The knowledge 
that they were behaving as if they were sweethearts was even more embarrassing, and the 
knowledge that they were both embarrassed embarrassed them so much that Captain 
Samaritano noticed it with a tremor of compassion. He extricated them from their 
difficulty by spending the next two hours explaining the controls and the general 
operation of the ship. They were sailing very slowly up a river without banks that 
meandered between arid sandbars stretching to the horizon. But unlike the troubled 
waters at the mouth of the river, these were slow and clear and gleamed like metal under 
the merciless sun. Fermina Daza had the impression that it was a delta filled with islands 
of sand. 

“It is all the river we have left,” said the Captain. 

Florentino Ariza, in fact, was surprised by the changes, and would be even more 
surprised the following day, when navigation became more difficult and he realized that 
the Magdalena, father of waters, one of the great rivers of the world, was only an illusion 
of memory. Captain Samaritano explained to them how fifty years of uncontrolled 
deforestation had destroyed the river: the boilers of the river-boats had consumed the 
thick forest of colossal trees that had oppressed Florentino Ariza on his first voyage. 
Fermina Daza would not see the animals of her dreams: the hunters for skins from the 
tanneries in New Orleans had exterminated the alligators that, with yawning mouths, had 
played dead for hours on end in the gullies along the shore as they lay in wait for 
butterflies, the parrots with their shrieking and the monkeys with their lunatic screams 
had died out as the foliage was destroyed, the manatees with their great breasts that had 
nursed their young and wept on the banks in a forlorn woman’s voice were an extinct 
species, annihilated by the armored bullets of hunters for sport. 

Captain Samaritano had an almost maternal affection for the manatees, because they 
seemed to him like ladies damned by some extravagant love, and he believed the truth of 
the legend that they were the only females in the animal kingdom that had no mates. He 
had always opposed shooting at them from the ship, which was the custom despite the 
laws prohibiting it. Once, a hunter from North Carolina, his papers in order, had 
disobeyed him, and with a well-aimed bullet from his Springfield rifle had shattered the 
head of a manatee mother whose baby became frantic with grief as it wailed over the 
fallen body. The Captain had the orphan brought on board so that he could care for it, and 


left the hunter behind on the deserted bank, next to the corpse of the murdered mother. 
He spent six months in prison as the result of diplomatic protests and almost lost his 
navigator’s license, but he came out prepared to do it again, as often as the need arose. 
Still, that had been a historic episode: the orphaned manatee, which grew up and lived for 
many years in the rare-animal zoo in San Nicolás de las Barrancas, was the last of its kind 
seen along the river. 

“Each time I pass that bank,” he said, “I pray to God that the gringo will board my ship 
so that I can leave him behind all over again.” 

Fermina Daza, who had felt no fondness for the Captain, was so moved by the 
tenderhearted giant that from that morning on he occupied a privileged place in her heart. 
She was not wrong: the trip was just beginning, and she would have many occasions to 
realize that she had not been mistaken. 

Fermina Daza and Florentino Ariza remained on the bridge until it was time for lunch. 
It was served a short while after they passed the town of Calamar on the opposite shore, 
which just a few years before had celebrated a perpetual fiesta and now was a ruined port 
with deserted streets. The only creature they saw from the boat was a woman dressed in 
white, signaling to them with a handkerchief. Fermina Daza could not understand why 
she was not picked up when she seemed so distressed, but the Captain explained that she 
was the ghost of a drowned woman whose deceptive signals were intended to lure ships 
off course into the dangerous whirlpools along the other bank. They passed so close that 
Fermina Daza saw her in sharp detail in the sunlight, and she had no doubt that she did 
not exist, but her face seemed familiar. 

It was a long, hot day. Fermina Daza returned to her cabin after lunch for her inevitable 
siesta, but she did not sleep well because of a pain in her ear, which became worse when 
the boat exchanged mandatory greetings with another R.C.C. vessel as they passed each 
other a few leagues above Barranca Vieja. Florentino Ariza fell into instantaneous sleep 
in the main salon, where most of the passengers without cabins were sleeping as if it were 
midnight, and close to the spot where he had seen her disembark, he dreamed of Rosalba. 
She was traveling alone, wearing her Mompox costume from the last century, and it was 
she and not the child who slept in the wicker cage that hung from the ceiling. It was a 
dream at once so enigmatic and so amusing that he enjoyed it for the rest of the afternoon 
as he played dominoes with the Captain and two of the passengers who were friends of 
his. 

It grew cooler as the sun went down, and the ship came back to life. The passengers 
seemed to emerge from a trance; they had just bathed and changed into fresh clothing, 
and they sat in the wicker armchairs in the salon, waiting for supper, which was 
announced at exactly five o’clock by a waiter who walked the deck from one end to the 
other and rang a sacristan’s bell, to mocking applause. While they were eating, the band 
began to play fandangos, and the dancing continued until midnight. 

Fermina Daza did not care to eat because of the pain in her ear, and she watched as the 
first load of wood for the boilers was taken on from a bare gully where there was nothing 
but stacked logs and a very old man who supervised the operation. There did not seem to 
be another person for many leagues around. For Fermina Daza it was a long, tedious stop 
that would have been unthinkable on the ocean liners to Europe, and the heat was so 
intense that she could feel it even on her cooled observation deck. But when the boat 
weighed anchor again there was a cool breeze scented with the heart of the forest, and the 


music became more lively. In the town of Sitio Nuevo there was only one light in only 
one window in only one house, and the port office did not signal either cargo or 
passengers, so the boat passed by without a greeting. 

Fermina Daza had spent the entire afternoon wondering what stratagems Florentino 
Ariza would use to see her without knocking at her cabin door, and by eight o’clock she 
could no longer bear the longing to be with him. She went out into the passageway, 
hoping to meet him in what would seem a casual encounter, and she did not have to go 
very far: Florentino Ariza was sitting on a bench in the passageway, as silent and forlorn 
as he had been in the Park of the Evangels, and for over two hours he had been asking 
himself how he was going to see her. They both made the same gesture of surprise that 
they both knew was feigned, and together they strolled the first-class deck, crowded with 
young people, most of them boisterous students who, with some eagerness, were 
exhausting themselves in the final fling of their vacation. In the lounge, Florentino Ariza 
and Fermina Daza sat at the bar as if they were students themselves and drank bottled soft 
drinks, and suddenly she saw herself in a frightening situation. She said: “How awful!” 
Florentino Ariza asked her what she was thinking that caused her so much distress. 

“The poor old couple,” she said. “The ones who were beaten to death in the boat.” 

They both decided to turn in when the music stopped, after a long, untroubled 
conversation on the dark observation deck. There was no moon, the sky was cloudy, and 
on the horizon flashes of lightning, with no claps of thunder, illuminated them for an 
instant. Florentino Ariza rolled cigarettes for her, but she did not smoke more than a few, 
for she was tormented by pain that would ease for a few moments and flare up again 
when the boat bellowed as it passed another ship or a sleeping village, or when it slowed 
to sound the depth of the river. He told her with what longing he had watched her at the 
Poetic Festival, on the balloon flight, on the acrobat’s velocipede, with what longing he 
had waited all year for public festivals just so he could see her. She had often seen him as 
well, and she had never imagined that he was there only to see her. However, it was less 
than a year since she had read his letters and wondered how it was possible that he had 
never competed in the Poetic Festival: there was no doubt he would have won. Florentino 
Ariza lied to her: he wrote only for her, verses for her, and only he read them. Then it was 
she who reached for his hand in the darkness, and she did not find it waiting for her as 
she had waited for his the night before. Instead, she took him by surprise, and Florentino 
Ariza’s heart froze. 

“How strange women are,” he said. 

She burst into laughter, a deep laugh like a young dove’s, and she thought again about 
the old couple in the boat. It was incised: the image would always pursue her. But that 
night she could bear it because she felt untroubled and calm, as she had few times in her 
life: free of all blame. She would have remained there until dawn, silent, with his hand 
perspiring ice into hers, but she could not endure the torment in her ear. So that when the 
music was over, and then the bustle of the ordinary passengers hanging their hammocks 
in the salon had ended, she realized that her pain was stronger than her desire to be with 
him. She knew that telling him about it would alleviate her suffering, but she did not 
because she did not want to worry him. For now it seemed to her that she knew him as 
well as if she had lived with him all her life, and she thought him capable of ordering the 
boat back to port if that would relieve her pain. 

Florentino Ariza had foreseen how things would be that night, and he withdrew. At the 


door of her cabin he tried to kiss her good night, but she offered him her left cheek. He 
insisted, with labored breath, and she offered him her other cheek, with a coquettishness 
that he had not known when she was a schoolgirl. Then he insisted again, and she offered 
him her lips, she offered her lips with a profound trembling that she tried to suppress with 
the laugh she had forgotten after her wedding night. 

“My God,” she said, “ships make me so crazy.” 

Florentino Ariza shuddered: as she herself had said, she had the sour smell of old age. 
Still, as he walked to his cabin, making his way through the labyrinth of sleeping 
hammocks, he consoled himself with the thought that he must give off the same odor, 
except his was four years older, and she must have detected it on him, with the same 
emotion. It was the smell of human fermentation, which he had perceived in his oldest 
lovers and they had detected in him. The Widow Nazaret, who kept nothing to herself, 
had told him in a cruder way: “Now we stink like a henhouse.” They tolerated each other 
because they were an even match: my odor against yours. On the other hand, he had often 
taken care of América Vicuña, whose diaper smell awakened maternal instincts in him, 
but he was disturbed at the idea that she had disliked his odor: the smell of a dirty old 
man. But all that belonged to the past. The important thing was that not since the 
afternoon when Aunt Escolástica left her missal on the counter in the telegraph office had 
Florentino Ariza felt the happiness he felt that night: so intense it frightened him. 

At five o’clock he was beginning to doze off, when the ship’s purser woke him in the 
port of Zambrano to hand him an urgent telegram. It was signed by Leona Cassiani and 
dated the previous day, and all its horror was contained in a single line: América Vicuña 
dead yesterday reasons unknown. At eleven o’clock in the morning he learned the details 
from Leona Cassiani in a telegraphic conference during which he himself operated the 
transmitting equipment for the first time since his years as a telegraph operator. América 
Vicuña, in the grip of mortal depression because she had failed her final examinations, 
had drunk a flask of laudanum stolen from the school infirmary. Florentino Ariza knew in 
the depths of his soul that the story was incomplete. But no: América Vicuña had left no 
explanatory note that would have allowed anyone to be blamed for her decision. The 
family, informed by Leona Cassiani, was arriving now from Puerto Padre, and the funeral 
would take place that afternoon at five o’clock. Florentino Ariza took a breath. The only 
thing he could do to stay alive was not to allow himself the anguish of that memory. He 
erased it from his mind, although from time to time in the years that were left to him he 
would feel it revive, with no warning and for no reason, like the sudden pang of an old 
scar. 

The days that followed were hot and interminable. The river became muddy and 
narrow, and instead of the tangle of colossal trees that had astonished Florentino Ariza on 
his first voyage, there were calcinated flatlands stripped of entire forests that had been 
devoured by the boilers of the riverboats, and the debris of godforsaken villages whose 
streets remained flooded even in the crudest droughts. At night they were awakened not 
by the siren songs of manatees on the sandy banks but by the nauseating stench of 
corpses floating down to the sea. For there were no more wars or epidemics, but the 
swollen bodies still floated by. The Captain, for once, was solemn: “We have orders to 
tell the passengers that they are accidental drowning victims.” Instead of the screeching 
of the parrots and the riotous noise of invisible monkeys, which at one time had 
intensified the stifling midday heat, all that was left was the vast silence of the ravaged 


land. 

There were so few places for taking on wood, and they were so far apart from each 
other, that by the fourth day of the trip the New Fidelity had run out of fuel. She was 
stranded for almost a week while her crew searched bogs of ashes for the last scattered 
trees. There was no one else: the woodcutters had abandoned their trails, fleeing the 
ferocity of the lords of the earth, fleeing the invisible cholera, fleeing the larval wars that 
governments were bent on hiding with distracted decrees. In the meantime, the 
passengers in their boredom held swimming contests, organized hunting expeditions, and 
returned with live iguanas that they split open from top to bottom and sewed up again 
with baling needles after removing the clusters of soft, translucent eggs that they strung 
over the railings to dry. The poverty-stricken prostitutes from nearby villages followed in 
the path of the expeditions, improvised tents in the gullies along the shore, brought music 
and liquor with them, and caroused across the river from the stranded vessel. 

Long before he became President of the R.C.C., Florentino Ariza had received 
alarming reports on the state of the river, but he barely read them. He would calm his 
associates: “Don’t worry, by the time the wood is gone there will be boats fueled by oil.” 
With his mind clouded by his passion for Fermina Daza, he never took the trouble to 
think about it, and by the time he realized the truth, there was nothing anyone could do 
except bring in a new river. Even in the days when the waters were at their best, the boats 
had to anchor at night, and then even the simple fact of being alive became unendurable. 
Most of the passengers, above all the Europeans, abandoned the pestilential stench of 
their cabins and spent the night walking the decks, brushing away all sorts of predatory 
creatures with the same towel they used to dry their incessant perspiration, and at dawn 
they were exhausted and swollen with bites. An English traveler at the beginning of the 
nineteenth century, referring to the journey by canoe and mule that could last as long as 
fifty days, had written: “This is one of the most miserable and uncomfortable pilgrimages 
that a human being can make.” This had no longer been true during the first eighty years 
of steam navigation, and then it became true again forever when the alligators ate the last 
butterfly and the maternal manatees were gone, the parrots, the monkeys, the villages 
were gone: everything was gone. 

“There’s no problem,” the Captain laughed. “In a few years, we’ll ride the dry riverbed 
in luxury automobiles.” 

For the first three days Fermina Daza and Florentino Ariza were protected by the soft 
springtime of the enclosed observation deck, but when the wood was rationed and the 
cooling system began to fail, the Presidential Suite became a steam bath. She survived the 
nights because of the river breeze that came in through the open windows, and she 
frightened off the mosquitoes with a towel because the insecticide bomb was useless 
when the boat was anchored. Her earache had become unbearable, and one morning 
when she awoke it stopped suddenly and completely, like the sound of a smashed cicada. 
But she did not realize that she had lost the hearing in her left ear until that night, when 
Florentino Ariza spoke to her on that side and she had to turn her head to hear what he 
was saying. She did not tell anyone, for she was resigned to the fact that it was one of the 
many irremediable defects of old age. 

In spite of everything, the delay had been a providential accident for them. Florentino 
Ariza had once read: “Love becomes greater and nobler in calamity.” The humidity in the 
Presidential Suite sub merged them in an unreal lethargy in which it was easier to love 


without questions. They spent unimaginable hours holding hands in the armchairs by the 
railing, they exchanged unhurried kisses, they enjoyed the rapture of caresses without the 
pitfalls of impatience. On the third stupefying night she waited for him with a bottle of 
anisette, which she used to drink in secret with Cousin Hildebranda’s band and later, after 
she was married and had children, behind closed doors with the friends from her 
borrowed world. She needed to be somewhat intoxicated in order not to think about her 
fate with too much lucidity, but Florentino Ariza thought it was to give herself courage 
for the final step. Encouraged by that illusion, he dared to explore her withered neck with 
his fingertips, her bosom armored in metal stays, her hips with their decaying bones, her 
thighs with their aging veins. She accepted with pleasure, her eyes closed, but she did not 
tremble, and she smoked and drank at regular intervals. At last, when his caresses slid 
over her belly, she had enough anisette in her heart. 

“If we’re going to do it, let’s do it,” she said, “but let’s do it like grownups.” 

She took him to the bedroom and, with the lights on, began to undress without false 
modesty. Florentino Ariza was on the bed, lying on his back and trying to regain control, 
once again not knowing what to do with the skin of the tiger he had slain. She said: 
“Don’t look.” He asked why without taking his eyes off the ceiling. 

“Because you won’t like it,” she said. 

Then he looked at her and saw her naked to her waist, just as he had imagined her. Her 
shoulders were wrinkled, her breasts sagged, her ribs were covered by a flabby skin as 
pale and cold as a frog’s. She covered her chest with the blouse she had just taken off, 
and she turned out the light. Then he sat up and began to undress in the darkness, 
throwing everything at her that he took off, while she tossed it back, dying of laughter. 

They lay on their backs for a long time, he more and more perturbed as his intoxication 
left him, and she peaceful, almost without will, but praying to God that she would not 
laugh like a fool, as she always did when she overindulged in anisette. They talked to 
pass the time. They spoke of themselves, of their divergent lives, of the incredible 
coincidence of their lying naked in a dark cabin on a stranded boat when reason told them 
they had time only for death. She had never heard of his having a woman, not even one, 
in that city where everything was known even before it happened. She spoke in a casual 
manner, and he replied without hesitation in a steady voice: 

“I’ve remained a virgin for you.” 

She would not have believed it in any event, even if it had been true, because his love 
letters were composed of similar phrases whose meaning mattered less than their 
brilliance. But she liked the spirited way in which he said it. Florentino Ariza, for his 
part, suddenly asked himself what he would never have dared to ask himself before: what 
kind of secret life had she led outside of her marriage? Nothing would have surprised 
him, because he knew that women are just like men in their secret adventures: the same 
stratagems, the same sudden inspirations, the same betrayals without remorse. But he was 
wise not to ask the question. Once, when her relations with the Church were already 
strained, her confessor had asked her out of the blue if she had ever been unfaithful to her 
husband, and she had stood up without responding, without concluding, without saying 
goodbye, and had never gone to confession again, with that confessor or with any other. 
But Florentino Ariza’s prudence had an unexpected reward: she stretched out her hand in 
the darkness, caressed his belly, his flanks, his almost hairless pubis. She said: “You have 
skin like a baby’s.” Then she took the final step: she searched for him where he was not, 


she searched again without hope, and she found him, unarmed. 

“It’s dead,” he said. 

It had happened to him sometimes, and he had learned to live with the phantom: each 
time he had to learn again, as if it were the first time. He took her hand and laid it on his 
chest: Fermina Daza felt the old, untiring heart almost bursting through his skin, beating 
with the strength, the rapidity, the irregularity of an adolescent’s. He said: “Too much 
love is as bad for this as no love at all.” But he said it without conviction: he was 
ashamed, furious with himself, longing for some reason to blame her for his failure. She 
knew it, and began to provoke his defenseless body with mock caresses, like a kitten 
delighting in cruelty, until he could no longer endure the martyrdom and he returned to 
his cabin. She thought about him until dawn, convinced at last of her love, and as the 
anisette left her in slow waves, she was invaded by the anguished fear that he was angry 
and would never return. 

But he returned the same day, refreshed and renewed, at the unusual hour of eleven 
o’clock, and he undressed in front of her with a certain ostentation. She was pleased to 
see him in the light just as she had imagined him in the darkness: an ageless man, with 
dark skin that was as shiny and tight as an opened umbrella, with no hair except for a few 
limp strands under his arms and at his groin. His guard was up, and she realized that he 
did not expose his weapon by accident, but displayed it as if it were a war trophy in order 
to give himself courage. He did not even give her time to take off the nightgown that she 
had put on when the dawn breeze began to blow, and his beginner’s haste made her 
shiver with compassion. But that did not disturb her, because in such cases it was not 
easy to distinguish between compassion and love. When it was over, however, she felt 
empty. 

It was the first time she had made love in over twenty years, and she had been held 
back by her curiosity concerning how it would feel at her age after so long a respite. But 
he had not given her time to find out if her body loved him too. It had been hurried and 
sad, and she thought: Now we’ve screwed up everything. But she was wrong: despite the 
disappointment that each of them felt, despite his regret for his clumsiness and her 
remorse for the madness of the anisette, they were not apart for a moment in the days that 
followed. Captain Samaritano, who uncovered by instinct any secret that anyone wanted 
to keep on his ship, sent them a white rose every morning, had them serenaded with old 
waltzes from their day, had meals prepared for them with aphrodisiac ingredients as a 
joke. They did not try to make love again until much later, when the inspiration came to 
them without their looking for it. They were satisfied with the simple joy of being 
together. 

They would not have thought of leaving the cabin if the Captain had not written them a 
note informing them that after lunch they would reach golden La Dorada, the last port on 
the eleven-day journey. From the cabin Fermina Daza and Florentino Ariza saw the 
promontory of houses lit by a pale sun, and they thought they understood the reason for 
its name, but it seemed less evident to them when they felt the heat that steamed like a 
caldron and saw the tar bubbling in the streets. Moreover, the boat did not dock there but 
on the opposite bank, where the terminal for the Santa Fe Railroad was located. 

They left their refuge as soon as the passengers disembarked. Fermina Daza breathed 
the good air of impunity in the empty salon, and from the gunwale they both watched a 
noisy crowd of people gathering their luggage in the cars of a train that looked like a toy. 


One would have thought they had come from Europe, above all the women, in their 
Nordic coats and hats from the last century that made no sense in the sweltering, dusty 
heat. Some wore beautiful potato blossoms in their hair, but they had begun to wither in 
the heat. They had just come from the Andean plateau after a train trip through a 
dreamlike savannah, and they had not had time to change their clothes for the Caribbean. 

In the middle of the bustling market, a very old man with an inconsolable expression 
on his face was pulling chicks out of the pockets of his beggar’s coat. He had appeared 
without warning, making his way through the crowd in a tattered overcoat that had 
belonged to someone much taller and heavier tha n he. He took off his hat, placed it brim 
up on the dock in case anyone wanted to throw him a coin, and began to empty his 
pockets of handfuls of pale baby chicks that seemed to proliferate in his fingers. In only a 
moment the dock appeared to be carpeted with cheeping chicks running everywhere 
among hurried travelers who trampled them without realizing it. Fascinated by the 
marvelous spectacle that seemed to be performed in her honor, for she was the only 
person watching it, Fermina Daza did not notice when the passengers for the return trip 
began to come on board. The party was over: among them she saw many faces she knew, 
some of them friends who until a short while ago had attended her in her grief, and she 
rushed to take refuge in her cabin. Florentino Ariza found her there, distraught: she would 
rather die than be seen on a pleasure trip, by people she knew, so soon after the death of 
her husband. Her preoccupation affected Florentino Ariza so much that he promised to 
think of some way to protect her other than keeping her in the cabin. 

The idea came to him all at once as they were having supper in the private dining room. 
The Captain was troubled by a problem he had wanted to discuss for a long time with 
Florentino Ariza, who always evaded him with his usual answer: “Leona Cassiani can 
handle those problems better than I can.” This time, however, he listened to him. The fact 
was that the boats carried cargo upriver, but came back empty, while the opposite 
occurred with passengers. “And the advantage of cargo is that it pays more and eats 
nothing,” he said. Fermina Daza, bored with the men’s enervated discussion concerning 
the possibility of establishing differential fares, ate without will. But Florentino Ariza 
pursued the discussion to its end, and only then did he ask the question that the Captain 
thought was the prelude to a solution: 

“And speaking hypothetically,” he said, “would it be possible to make a trip without 
stopping, without cargo or passengers, without coming into any port, without anything?” 

The Captain said that it was possible, but only hypothetically. The R.C.C. had business 
commitments that Florentino Ariza was more familiar with than he was, it had contracts 
for cargo, passengers, mail, and a great deal more, and most of them were unbreakable. 
The only thing that would allow them to bypass all that was a case of cholera on board. 
The ship would be quarantined, it would hoist the yellow flag and sail in a state of 
emergency. Captain Samaritano had needed to do just that on several occasions because 
of the many cases of cholera along the river, although later the health authorities had 
obliged the doctors to sign death certificates that called the cases common dysentery. 
Besides, many times in the history of the river the yellow plague flag had been flown in 
order to evade taxes, or to avoid picking up an undesirable passenger, or to elude 
inopportune inspections. Florentino Ariza reached for Fermina Daza’s hand under the 
table. 

“Well, then,” he said, “let’s do that.” 


The Captain was taken by surprise, but then, with the instinct of an old fox, he saw 
everything clearly. 

“I command on this ship, but you command us,” he said. “So if you are serious, give 
me the order in writing and we will leave right now.” 

Florentino Ariza was serious, of course, and he signed the order. After all, everyone 
knew that the time of cholera had not ended despite all the joyful statistics from the 
health officials. As for the ship, there was no problem. The little cargo they had taken on 
was transferred, they told the passengers there had been a mechanical failure, and early 
that morning they sent them on their way on a ship that belonged to another company. If 
such things were done for so many immoral, even contemptible reasons, Florentino Ariza 
could not see why it would not be legitimate to do them for love. All that the Captain 
asked was that they stop in Puerto Nare to pick up someone who would accompany him 
on the voyage: he, too, had his secret heart. 

So the New Fidelity weighed anchor at dawn the next day, without cargo or passengers, 
and with the yellow cholera flag waving jubilantly from the mainmast. At dusk in Puerto 
Nare they picked up a woman who was even taller and stouter than the Captain, an 
uncommon beauty who needed only a beard to be hired by a circus. Her name was 
Zenaida Neves, but the Captain called her “my wild woman”: an old friend whom he 
would pick up in one port and leave in another, and who came on board followed by the 
winds of joy. In that sad place of death, where Florentino Ariza relived his memories of 
Rosalba when he saw the train from Envigado struggling to climb the old mule trail, there 
was an Amazonian downpour that would continue with very few pauses for the rest of the 
trip. But no one cared: the floating fiesta had its own roof. That night, as a personal 
contribution to the revelry, Fermina Daza went down to the galley amid the ovations of 
the crew and prepared a dish for everyone that she created and that Florentino Ariza 
christened Eggplant al Amor. 

During the day they played cards, ate until they were bursting, took gritty siestas that 
left them exhausted, and as soon as the sun was down the orchestra began to play, and 
they had anisette with salmon until they could eat and drink no more. It was a rapid 
journey: the boat was light and the currents favorable and even improved by the floods 
that rushed down from the headwaters, where it rained as much that week as it had during 
the entire voyage. Some villages fired charitable cannons for them to frighten away the 
cholera, and they expressed their gratitude with a mournful bellow. The ships they passed 
on the way, regardless of the company they belonged to, signaled their condolences. In 
the town of Magangué, where Mercedes was born, they took on enough wood for the rest 
of the trip. 

Fermina Daza was horrified when she heard the boat’s horn with her good ear, but by 
the second day of anisette she could hear better with both of them. She discovered that 
roses were more fragrant than before, that the birds sang at dawn much better than before, 
and that God had created a manatee and placed it on the bank at Tamalameque just so it 
could awaken her. The Captain heard it, had the boat change course, and at last they saw 
the enormous matron nursing the baby that she held in her arms. Neither Florentino nor 
Fermina was aware of how well they understood each other: she helped him to take his 
enemas, she got up before he did to brush the false teeth he kept in a glass while he slept, 
and she solved the problem of her misplaced spectacles, for she could use his for reading 
and mending. When she awoke one morning, she saw him sewing a button on his shirt in 


the darkness, and she hurried to do it for him before he could say the ritual phrase about 
needing two wives. On the other hand, the only thing she needed from him was that he 
cup a pain in her back. 

Florentino Ariza, for his part, began to revive old memories with a violin borrowed 
from the orchestra, and in half a day he could play the waltz of “The Crowned Goddess” 
for her, and he played it for hours until they forced him to stop. One night, for the first 
time in her life, Fermina Daza suddenly awoke choking on tears of sorrow, not of rage, at 
the memory of the old couple in the boat beaten to death by the boatman. On the other 
hand, the incessant rain did not affect her, and she thought too late that perhaps Paris was 
not as gloomy as it had seemed, that Santa Fe did not have so many funerals passing 
along the streets. The dream of other voyages with Florentino Ariza appeared on the 
horizon: mad voyages, free of trunks, free of social commitments: voyages of love. 

The night before their arrival they had a grand party with paper garlands and colored 
lights. The weather cleared at nightfall. Holding each other very close, the Captain and 
Zenaida danced the first boleros that were just beginning to break hearts in those days. 
Florentino Ariza dared to suggest to Fermina Daza that they dance their private waltz, but 
she refused. Nevertheless she kept time with her head and her heels all night, and there 
was even a moment when she danced sitting down without realizing it, while the Captain 
merged with his young wild woman in the shadows of the bolero. She drank so much 
anisette that she had to be helped up the stairs, and she suffered an attack of laughing 
until she cried, which alarmed everyone. However, when at last she recovered her self-
possession in the perfumed oasis of her cabin, they made the tranquil, wholesome love of 
experienced grandparents, which she would keep as her best memory of that lunatic 
voyage. Contrary to what the Captain and Zenaida supposed, they no longer felt like 
newlyweds, and even less like belated lovers. It was as if they had leapt over the arduous 
calvary of conjugal life and gone straight to the heart of love. They were together in 
silence like an old married couple wary of life, beyond the pitfalls of passion, beyond the 
brutal mockery of hope and the phantoms of disillusion: beyond love. For they had lived 
together long enough to know that love was always love, anytime and anyplace, but it 
was more solid the closer it came to death. 

They awoke at six o’clock. She had a headache scented with anisette, and her heart was 
stunned by the impression that Dr. Juvenal Urbino had come back, plumper and younger 
than when he had fallen from the tree, and that he was sitting in his rocking chair, waiting 
for her at the door of their house. She was, however, lucid enough to realize that this was 
the result not of the anisette but of her imminent return. 

“It is going to be like dying,” she said. 

Florentino Ariza was startled, because her words read a thought that had given him no 
peace since the beginning of the voyage home. Neither one could imagine being in any 
other home but the cabin, or eating in any other way but on the ship, or living any other 
life, for that would be alien to them forever. It was, indeed, like dying. He could not go 
back to sleep. He lay on his back in bed, his hands crossed behind his head. At a certain 
moment, the pangs of grief for América Vicuña made him twist with pain, and he could 
not hold off the truth any longer: he locked himself in the bathroom and cried, slowly, 
until his last tear was shed. Only then did he have the courage to admit to himself how 
much he had loved her. 

When they went up, already dressed for going ashore, the ship had left behind the 


narrow channels and marshes of the old Spanish passage and was navigating around the 
wrecks of boats and the platforms of oil wells in the bay. A radiant Thursday was 
breaking over the golden domes of the city of the Viceroys, but Fermina Daza, standing 
at the railing, could not bear the pestilential stink of its glories, the arrogance of its 
bulwarks profaned by iguanas: the horror of real life. They did not say anything, but 
neither one felt capable of capitulating so easily. 

They found the Captain in the dining room, in a disheveled condition that did not 
accord with his habitual neatness: he was unshaven, his eyes were bloodshot from lack of 
sleep, his clothing was still sweaty from the previous night, his speech was interrupted by 
belches of anisette. Zenaida was asleep. They were beginning to eat their breakfast in 
silence, when a motor launch from the Health Department ordered them to stop the ship. 

The Captain, standing on the bridge, shouted his answers to the questions put to him by 
the armed patrol. They wanted to know what kind of pestilence they carried on board, 
how many passengers there were, how many of them were sick, what possibility there 
was for new infections. The Captain replied that they had only three passengers on board 
and all of them had cholera, but they were being kept in strict seclusion. Those who were 
to come on board in La Dorada, and the twenty-seven men of the crew, had not had any 
contact with the m. But the commander of the patrol was not satisfied, and he ordered 
them to leave the bay and wait in Las Mercedes Marsh until two o’clock in the afternoon, 
while the forms were prepared for placing the ship in quarantine. The Captain let loose 
with a wagon driver’s fart, and with a wave of his hand he ordered the pilot to turn 
around and go back to the marshes. 

Fermina Daza and Florentino Ariza had heard everything from their table, but that did 
not seem to matter to the Captain. He continued to eat in silence, and his bad humor was 
evident in the manner in which he breached the rules of etiquette that sustained the 
legendary reputation of the riverboat captains. He broke apart his four fried eggs with the 
tip of his knife, and he ate them with slices of green plantain, which he placed whole in 
his mouth and chewed with savage delight. Fermina Daza and Florentino Ariza looked at 
him without speaking, as if waiting on a school bench to hear their final grades. They had 
not exchanged a word during his conversation with the health patrol, nor did they have 
the slightest idea of what would become of their lives, but they both knew that the 
Captain was thinking for them: they could see it in the throbbing of his temples. 

While he finished off his portion of eggs, the tray of fried plantains, and the pot of café 
con leche, the ship left the bay with its boilers quiet, made its way along the channels 
through blankets of taruya, the river lotus with purple blossoms and large heart-shaped 
leaves, and returned to the marshes. The water was iridescent with the universe of fishes 
floating on their sides, killed by the dynamite of stealthy fishermen, and all the birds of 
the earth and the water circled above them with metallic cries. The wind from the 
Caribbean blew in the windows along with the racket made by the birds, and Fermina 
Daza felt in her blood the wild beating of her free will. To her right, the muddy, frugal 
estuary of the Great Magdalena River spread out to the other side of the world. 

When there was nothing left to eat on the plates, the Captain wiped his lips with a 
corner of the tablecloth and broke into indecent slang that ended once and for all the 
reputation for fine speech enjoyed by the riverboat captains. For he was not speaking to 
them or to anyone else, but was trying instead to come to terms with his own rage. His 
conclusion, after a string of barbaric curses, was that he could find no way out of the 


mess he had gotten into with the cholera flag. 

Florentino Ariza listened to him without blinking. Then he looked through the 
windows at the complete circle of the quadrant on the mariner’s compass, the clear 
horizon, the December sky without a single cloud, the waters that could be navigated 
forever, and he said: 

“Let us keep going, going, going, back to La Dorada.” 

Fermina Daza shuddered because she recognized his former voice, illuminated by the 
grace of the Holy Spirit, and she looked at the Captain: he was their destiny. But the 
Captain did not see her because he was stupefied by Florentino Ariza’s tremendous 
powers of inspiration. 

“Do you mean what you say?” he asked. 

“From the moment I was born,” said Florentino Ariza, “I have never said anything I 
did not mean.” 

The Captain looked at Fermina Daza and saw on her eyelashes the first glimmer of 
wintry frost. Then he looked at Florentino Ariza, his invincible power, his intrepid love, 
and he was overwhelmed by the belated suspicion that it is life, more than death, that has 
no limits. 

“And how long do you think we can keep up this goddamn coming and go ing?” he 
asked. 

Florentino Ariza had kept his answer ready for fifty-three years, seven months, and 
eleven days and nights. 

“Forever,” he said. 



The Aleph

To Estela Canto
(1945)

O God! I could be bounded in a nutshell, and count myself
a King of infinite space. . . .
Hamlet, II, 2

But they will teach us that Eternity is the Standing still of the
Present Time, a Nunc-stans
(as the Schools call it); which
neither they, nor any else understand, no more than they
would a Hic-stans for an Infinite greatness of Place.

Leviathan, IV, 46

On the burning February morning Beatriz Viterbo died,
after braving an agony that never for a single moment gave
way to self-pity or fear, I noticed that the sidewalk billboards around Constitution Plaza were advertising some
new brand or other of American cigarettes. The fact pained
me, for I realized that the wide and ceaseless universe was
already slipping away from her and that this slight change
was the first of an endless series. The universe may change
but not me, I thought with a certain sad vanity. I knew
that at times my fruitless devotion had annoyed her; now
that she was dead, I could devote myself to her memory,
without hope but also without humiliation. I recalled that
the thirtieth of April was her birthday; on that day to visit
her house on Garay Street and pay my respects to her
father and to Carlos Argentino Daneri, her first cousin,
would be an irreproachable and perhaps unavoidable act of
politeness. Once again I would wait in the twilight of the
small, cluttered drawing room, once again I would study
the details of her many photographs: Beatriz Viterbo in
profile and in full color; Beatriz wearing a mask, during
the Carnival of 1921; Beatriz at her First Communion;
Beatriz on the day of her wedding to Roberto Alessandri;
Beatriz soon after her divorce, at a luncheon at the Turf
Club; Beatriz at a seaside resort in Quilmes with Delia San
Marco Porcel and Carlos Argentino; Beatriz with the Pekinese lapdog given her by Villegas Haedo; Beatriz, front
and three-quarter views, smiling, hand on her chin. . . . I
would not be forced, as in the past, to justify my presence
with modest offerings of books—books whose pages I finally
learned to cut beforehand, so as not to find out, months
later, that they lay around unopened.

Beatriz Viterbo died in 1929. From that time on, I
never let a thirtieth of April go by without a visit to her
house. I used to make my appearance at seven-fifteen sharp
and stay on for some twenty-five minutes. Each year, I
arrived a little later and stayed a little longer. In 1933, a
torrential downpour coming to my aid, they were obliged to
ask me to dinner. Naturally, I took advantage of that lucky
precedent. In 1934, I arrived, just after eight, with one of
those large Santa Fe sugared cakes, and quite matter-offactly I stayed to dinner. It was in this way, on these
melancholy and vainly erotic anniversaries, that I came
into the gradual confidences of Carlos Argentino Daneri.

Beatriz had been tall, frail, slightly stooped; in her walk
there was (if the oxymoron may be allowed) a kind of
uncertain grace, a hint of expectancy. Carlos Argentino was
pink-faced, overweight, gray-haired, fine-featured. He held
a minor position in an unreadable library out on the edge
of the Southside of Buenos Aires. He was authoritarian but
also unimpressive. Until only recently, he took advantage
of his nights and holidays to stay at home. At a remove of
two generations, the Italian “S” and demonstrative Italian
gestures still survived in him. His mental activity was
continuous, deeply felt, far-reaching, and—all in all—
meaningless. He dealt in pointless analogies and in trivial
scruples. He had (as did Beatriz) large, beautiful, finely
shaped hands. For several months he seemed to be obsessed
with Paul Fort—less with his ballads than with the idea of a
towering reputation. “He is the Prince of poets,” Daneri
would repeat fatuously. “You will belittle him in vain—but
no, not even the most venomous of your shafts will grazehim.”

On the thirtieth of April, 1941, along with the sugared
cake I allowed myself to add a bottle of Argentine cognac.
Carlos Argentino tasted it, pronounced it “interesting,”
and, after a few drinks, launched into a glorification of
modern man.

“I view him,” he said with a certain unaccountable
excitement, “in his inner sanctum, as though in his castle
tower, supplied with telephones, telegraphs, phonographs,
wireless sets, motion-picture screens, slide projectors, glossaries, timetables, handbooks, bulletins. . . .”

He remarked that for a man so equipped, actual travel
was superfluous. Our twentieth century had inverted the
story of Mohammed and the mountain; nowadays, the
mountain came to the modern Mohammed.

So foolish did his ideas seem to me, so pompous and so
drawn out his exposition, that I linked them at once to
literature and asked him why he didn’t write them down.
As might be foreseen, he answered that he had already
done so—that these ideas, and others no less striking, had
found their place in the Proem, or Augural Canto, or, more
simply, the Prologue Canto of the poem on which he had
been working for many years now, alone, without publicity,
without fanfare, supported only by those twin staffs universally known as work and solitude. First, he said, he
opened the floodgates of his fancy; then, taking up hand
tools, he resorted to the file. The poem was entitled The
Earth; it consisted of a description of the planet, and, of
course, lacked no amount of picturesque digressions and
bold apostrophes.

I asked him to read me a passage, if only a short one. He
opened a drawer of his writing table, drew out a thick stack
of papers—sheets of a large pad imprinted with the letterhead of the Juan Crisóstomo Lafinur Library—and, with
ringing satisfaction, declaimed:

Mine eyes, as did the Greek’s, have known men’s towns and fame,
The works, the days in light that fades to amber;
I do not change a fact or falsify a name—
The voyage I set down is . . . autour de ma chambre.
“From any angle, a greatly interesting stanza,” he said,
giving his verdict. “The opening line wins the applause of
the professor, the academician, and the Hellenist—to say
nothing of the would-be scholar, a considerable sector of
the public. The second flows from Homer to Hesiod (generous homage, at the very outset, to the father of didactic
poetry), not without rejuvenating a process whose roots go
back to Scripture—enumeration, congeries, conglomeration.
The third—baroque? decadent? example of the cult of pure
form?—consists of two equal hemistichs. The fourth, frankly
bilingual, assures me the unstinted backing of all minds
sensitive to the pleasures of sheer fun. I should, in all
fairness, speak of the novel rhyme in lines two and four,
and of the erudition that allows me—without a hint of
pedantry!—to cram into four lines three learned allusions
covering thirty centuries packed with literature—first to the
Odyssey,
second to Works and Days, and third to the
immortal bagatelle bequeathed us by the frolicking pen of
the Savoyard, Xavier de Maistre. Once more I’ve come to
realize that modern art demands the balm of laughter, the
scherzo. Decidedly, Goldoni holds the stage!”

He read me many other stanzas, each of which also won
his own approval and elicited his lengthy explications.
There was nothing remarkable about them. I did not even
find them any worse than the first one. Application, resignation, and chance had gone into the writing; I saw, however,
that Daneri’s real work lay not in the poetry but in his
invention of reasons why the poetry should be admired. Of
course, this second phase of his effort modified the writing
in his eyes, though not in the eyes of others. Daneri’s style
of delivery was extravagant, but the deadly drone of his
metric regularity tended to tone down and to dull that
extravagance.*

Only once in my life have I had occasion to look into the
fifteen thousand alexandrines of the Polyolbion, that topographical epic in which Michael Drayton recorded the
flora, fauna, hydrography, orography, military and monastic
history of England. I am sure, however, that this limited
but bulky production is less boring than Carlos Argentino’s
similar vast undertaking. Daneri had in mind to set to
verse the entire face of the planet, and, by 1941, had
already displaced a number of acres of the State of
Queensland, nearly a mile of the course run by the River
Ob, a gasworks to the north of Veracruz, the leading
shops in the Buenos Aires parish of Concepción, the villa of
Mariana Cambaceres de Alvear in the Belgrano section of
the Argentine capital, and a Turkish baths establishment
not far from the well-known Brighton Aquarium. He read me
certain long-winded passages from his Australian section,
and at one point praised a word of his own coining, the
color “celestewhite,” which he felt “actually suggests
the
sky, an element of utmost importance in the landscape of
the continent Down Under.” But these sprawling, lifeless
hexameters lacked even the relative excitement of the socalled Augural Canto. Along about midnight, I left.

Two Sundays later, Daneri rang me up—perhaps for the
first time in his life. He suggested we get together at four
o’clock “for cocktails in the salon-bar next door, which the
forward-looking Zunino and Zungri—my landlords, as you

* Among my memories are also some lines of a satire in which he lashed
out unsparingly at bad poets. After accusing them of dressing their poems
in the warlike armor of erudition, and of flapping in vain their unavailing
wings, he concluded with this verse:

But they forget, alas, one foremost fact—beauty!

Only the fear of creating an army of implacable and powerful enemies
dissuaded him (he told me) from fearlessly publishing this poem.
doubtless recall—are throwing open to the public. It’s a
place you’ll really want to get to know.”

More in resignation than in pleasure, I accepted. Once
there, it was hard to find a table. The “salon-bar,” ruthlessly modern, was only barely less ugly than what I had
expected; at the nearby tables, the excited customers spoke
breathlessly of the sums Zunino and Zungri had invested in
furnishings without a second thought to cost. Carlos Argentino pretended to be astonished by some feature or other of
the lighting arrangement (with which, I felt, he was already
familiar), and he said to me with a certain severity,
“Grudgingly, you’ll have to admit to the fact that these
premises hold their own with many others far more in the
public eye.”

He then reread me four or five different fragments of the
poem. He had revised them following his pet principle of
verbal ostentation: where at first “blue” had been good
enough, he now wallowed in “azures,” “ceruleans,” and
“ultramarines.” The word “milky” was too easy for him;
in the course of an impassioned description of a shed where
wool was washed, he chose such words as “lacteal,” “lactescent,” and even made one up—“lactinacious.” After that,
straight out, he condemned our modern mania for having
books prefaced, “a practice already held up to scorn by the
Prince of Wits in his own graceful preface to the Quixote.”
He admitted, however, that for the opening of his new work
an attention-getting foreword might prove valuable—“an accolade signed by a literary hand of renown.” He next went
on to say that he considered publishing the initial cantos of
his poem. I then began to understand the unexpected telephone call; Daneri was going to ask me to contribute a
foreword to his pedantic hodgepodge. My fear turned out
unfounded; Carlos Argentino remarked, with admiration
and envy, that surely he could not be far wrong in qualifying with the epithet “solid” the prestige enjoyed in everycircle by Álvaro Melián Lafinur, a man of letters, who would,
if I insisted on it, be only too glad to dash off some
charming opening words to the poem. In order to avoid
ignominy and failure, he suggested I make myself spokesman for two of the book’s undeniable virtues—formal perfection and scientific rigor—“inasmuch as this wide garden
of metaphors, of figures of speech, of elegances, is inhospitable to the least detail not strictly upholding of truth.” He
added that Beatriz had always been taken with Álvaro.

I agreed—agreed profusely—and explained for the sake
of credibility that I would not speak to Álvaro the next day,
Monday, but would wait until Thursday, when we got
together for the informal dinner that follows every meeting
of the Writers’ Club. (No such dinners are ever held, but it
is an established fact that the meetings do take place on
Thursdays, a point which Carlos Argentino Daneri could
verify in the daily papers, and which lent a certain reality
to my promise.) Half in prophecy, half in cunning, I said
that before taking up the question of a preface I would
outline the unusual plan of the work. We then said goodbye.

Turning the corner of Bernardo de Irigoyen, I reviewed
as impartially as possible the alternatives before me. They
were: a) to speak to Álvaro, telling him this first cousin of
Beatriz’ (the explanatory euphemism would allow me to
mention her name) had concocted a poem that seemed to
draw out into infinity the possibilities of cacophony and
chaos: b) not to say a word to Álvaro. I clearly foresaw that
my indolence would opt for b.

But first thing Friday morning, I began worrying about
the telephone. It offended me that that device, which had
once produced the irrecoverable voice of Beatriz, could now
sink so low as to become a mere receptacle for the futile
and perhaps angry remonstrances of that deluded Carlos
Argentino Daneri. Luckily, nothing happened—except the
inevitable spite touched off in me by this man, who had
asked me to fulfill a delicate mission for him and then had
let me drop.

Gradually, the phone came to lose its terrors, but one
day toward the end of October it rang, and Carlos Argentino
was on the line. He was deeply disturbed, so much o  that at the outset I did not recognize his voice. Sadly but
angrily he stammered that the now unrestrainable Zunino
and Zungri, under the pretext of enlarging their already
outsized “salon-bar,” were about to take over and tear
down his house.

“My home, my ancestral home, my old and inveterate
Garay Street home!” he kept repeating, seeming to forget
his woe in the music of his words.

It was not hard for me to share his distress. After the age
of fifty, all change becomes a hateful symbol of the passing
of time. Besides, the scheme concerned a house that for me
would always stand for Beatriz. I tried explaining this
delicate scruple of regret, but Daneri seemed not to hear
me. He said that if Zunino and Zungri persisted in this
outrage, Doctor Zunni, his lawyer, would sue ipso facto
and
make them pay some fifty thousand dollars in damages.

Zunni’s name impressed me; his firm, although at the
unlikely address of Caseros and Tacuarí, was nonetheless
known as an old and reliable one. I asked him whether
Zunni had already been hired for the case. Daneri said he
would phone him that very afternoon. He hesitated, then
with that level, impersonal voice we reserve for confiding
something intimate, he said that to finish the poem he could
not get along without the house because down in the cellar
there was an Aleph. He explained that an Aleph is one of
the points in space that contains all other points.

“It’s in the cellar under the dining room,” he went on, so
overcome by his worries now that he forgot to be pompous.
“It’s mine—mine. I discovered it when I was a child, all by
myself. The cellar stairway is so steep that my aunt and
uncle forbade my using it, but I’d heard someone say there
was a world down there. I found out later they meant an
old-fashioned globe of the world, but at the time I thought
they were referring to the world itself. One day when no
one was home I started down in secret, but I stumbled and
fell. When I opened my eyes, I saw the Aleph.”

“The Aleph?” I repeated.

“Yes, the only place on earth where all places are—seen
from every angle, each standing clear, without any confusion or blending. I kept the discovery to myself and went
back every chance I got. As a child, I did not foresee that
this privilege was granted me so that later I could write
the poem. Zunino and Zungri will not strip me of what’s
mine—no, and a thousand times no! Legal code in hand,
Doctor Zunni will prove that my Aleph is inalienable.”

I tried to reason with him. “But isn’t the cellar very
dark?” I said.

“Truth cannot penetrate a closed mind. If all places in
the universe are in the Aleph, then all stars, all lamps, all
sources of light are in it, too.”

“You wait there. I’ll be right over to see it.”

I hung up before he could say no. The full knowledge
of a fact sometimes enables you to see all at once many
supporting but previously unsuspected things. It amazed
me not to have suspected until that moment that Carlos
Argentino was a madman. As were all the Viterbos, when
you came down to it. Beatriz (I myself often say it) was a
woman, a child, with almost uncanny powers of clairvoyance, but forgetfulness, distractions, contempt, and a streak
of cruelty were also in her, and perhaps these called for a
pathological explanation. Carlos Argentino’s madness filled
me with spiteful elation. Deep down, we had always detested each other.

On Garay Street, the maid asked me kindly to wait. The
master was, as usual, in the cellar developing pictures. On
the unplayed piano, beside a large vase that held no flowers, smiled (more timeless than belonging to the past) the
large photograph of Beatriz, in gaudy colors. Nobody could
see us; in a seizure of tenderness, I drew close to the
portrait and said to it, “Beatriz, Beatriz Elena, Beatriz
Elena Viterbo, darling Beatriz, Beatriz now gone forever,
it’s me, it’s Borges.”

Moments later, Carlos came in. He spoke drily. I could
see he was thinking of nothing else but the loss of the
Aleph.

“First a glass of pseudo-cognac,” he ordered, “and then
down you dive into the cellar. Let me warn yon, you’ll have
to lie flat on your back. Total darkness, total immobility,
and a certain ocular adjustment will also be necessary.
From the floor, you must focus your eyes on the nineteenth
step. Once I leave you, I’ll lower the trapdoor and you’ll be
quite alone. You needn’t fear the rodents very much—
though I know you will. In a minute or two, you’ll see the
Aleph—the microcosm of the alchemists and Kabbalists, our
true proverbial friend, the multum in parvo!”

Once we were in the dining room, he added, “Of course,
if you don’t see it, your incapacity will not invalidate what
I have experienced. Now, down you go. In a short while
you can babble with all of Beatriz’ images.”

Tired of his inane words, I quickly made my way. The
cellar, barely wider than the stairway itself, was something
of a pit. My eyes searched the dark, looking in vain for the
globe Carlos Argentino had spoken of. Some cases of empty
bottles and some canvas sacks cluttered one corner. Carlos
picked up a sack, folded it in two, and at a fixed spot
spread it out.

“As a pillow,” he said, “this is quite threadbare, but if
it’s padded even a half-inch higher, you won’t see a thing,
and there you’ll lie, feeling ashamed and ridiculous. All
right now, sprawl that hulk of yours there on the floor and
count off nineteen steps.”

I went through with his absurd requirements, and at last
he went away. The trapdoor was carefully shut. The blackness, in spite of a chink that I later made out, seemed to
me absolute. For the first time, I realized the danger I was
in: I’d let myself be locked in a cellar by a lunatic, after
gulping down a glassful of poison! I knew that back of
Carlos’ transparent boasting lay a deep fear that I might
not see the promised wonder. To keep his madness undetected, to keep from admitting that he was mad, Carlos had
to kill me. I felt a shock of panic, which I tried to pin to my
uncomfortable position and not to the effect of a drug. I
shut my eyes—I opened them. Then I saw the Aleph.

I arrive now at the ineffable core of my story. And here
begins my despair as a writer. All language is a set of
symbols whose use among its speakers assumes a shared
past. How, then, can I translate into words the limitless
Aleph, which my floundering mind can scarcely encompass?
Mystics, faced with the same problem, fall back on symbols: to signify the godhead, one Persian speaks of a bird
that somehow is all birds; Alanus de Insulis, of a sphere
whose center is everywhere and circumference is nowhere;
Ezekiel, of a four-faced angel who at one and the same time
moves east and west, north and south. (Not in vain do I
recall these inconceivable analogies; they bear some relation
to the Aleph.) Perhaps the gods might grant me a similar
metaphor, but then this account would become contaminated
by literature, by fiction. Really, what I want to do is impossible, for any listing of an endless series is doomed to be
infinitesimal. In that single gigantic instant I saw millions
of acts both delightful and awful; not one of them amazed
me more than the fact that all of them occupied the same
point in space, without overlapping or transparency. What
my eyes beheld was simultaneous, but what I shall now
write down will be successive, because language is successive. Nonetheless, I’ll try to recollect what I can.

On the back part of the step, toward the right, I saw a
small iridescent sphere of almost unbearable brilliance. At
first I thought it was revolving; then I realized that this
movement was an illusion created by the dizzying world it
bounded. The Aleph’s diameter was probably little more
than an inch, but all space was there, actual and undiminished. Each thing (a mirror’s face, let us say) was infinite
things, since I distinctly saw it from every angle of the
universe. I saw the teeming sea; I saw daybreak and
nightfall; I saw the multitudes of America; I saw a silvery
cobweb in the center of a black pyramid; I saw a splintered
labyrinth (it was London); I saw, close up, unending eyes
watching themselves in me as in a mirror; I saw all the
mirrors on earth and none of them reflected me; I saw in a
backyard of Soler Street the same tiles that thirty years
before I’d seen in the entrance of a house in Fray Bentos; I
saw bunches of grapes, snow, tobacco, lodes of metal,
steam; I saw convex equatorial deserts and each one of
their grains of sand; I saw a woman in Inverness whom I
shall never forget; I saw her tangled hair, her tall figure, I
saw the cancer in her breast; I saw a ring of baked mud in
a sidewalk, where before there had been a tree; I saw a
summer house in Adrogué and a copy of the first English
translation of Pliny—Philemon Holland’s—and all at the
same time saw each letter on each page (as a boy, I used to
marvel that the letters in a closed book did not get scrambled and lost overnight); I saw a sunset in Querétaro that
seemed to reflect the color of a rose in Bengal; I saw my
empty bedroom; I saw in a closet in Alkmaar a terrestrial
globe between two mirrors that multiplied it endlessly; I
saw horses with flowing manes on a shore of the Caspian
Sea at dawn; I saw the delicate bone structure of a hand; I
saw the survivors of a battle sending out picture postcards;
I saw in a showcase in Mirzapur a pack of Spanish playing
cards; I saw the slanting shadows of ferns on a greenhouse
floor; I saw tigers, pistons, bison, tides, and armies; I saw
all the ants on the planet; I saw a Persian astrolabe; I saw
in the drawer of a writing table (and the handwriting made
me tremble) unbelievable, obscene, detailed letters, which
Beatriz had written to Carlos Argentino; I saw a monument
I worshiped in the Chacarita cemetery; I saw the rotted
dust and bones that had once deliciously been Beatriz
Viterbo; I saw the circulation of my own dark blood; I saw
the coupling of love and the modification of death; I saw
the Aleph from every point and angle, and in the Aleph I
saw the earth and in the earth the Aleph and in the Aleph
the earth; I saw my own face and my own bowels; I saw
your face; and I felt dizzy and wept, for my eyes had seen
that secret and conjectured object whose name is common
to all men but which no man has looked upon—the unimaginable universe.

I felt infinite wonder, infinite pity.

“Feeling pretty cockeyed, are you, after so much spying
into places where you have no business?” said a hated and
jovial voice. “Even if you were to rack your brains, you
couldn’t pay me back in a hundred years for this revelation.
One hell of an observatory, eh, Borges?”

Carlos Argentino’s feet were planted on the topmost step.
In the sudden dim light, I managed to pick myself up and
utter, “One hell of a—yes, one hell of a.”

The matter-of-factness of my voice surprised me. Anxiously, Carlos Argentino went on.

“Did you see everything—really clear, in colors?”

At that very moment I found my revenge. Kindly, openly pitying him, distraught, evasive, I thanked Carlos Argentino Daneri for the hospitality of his cellar and urged
him to make the most of the demolition to get away from
the pernicious metropolis, which spares no one—believe me,
I told him, no one! Quietly and forcefully, I refused to
discuss the Aleph. On saying goodbye, I embraced him and
repeated that the country, that fresh air and quiet were the
great physicians.

Out on the street, going down the stairways inside Constitution Station, riding the subway, every one of the faces
seemed familiar to me. I was afraid that not a single thing
on earth would ever again surprise me; I was afraid I
would never again be free of all I had seen. Happily, after
a few sleepless nights, I was visited once more by oblivion.

Postscript of March first, 1943—Some six months after
the pulling down of a certain building on Garay Street, Procrustes & Co., the publishers, not put off by the considerable length of Daneri’s poem, brought out a selection of its
“Argentine sections.” It is redundant now to repeat what
happened. Carlos Argentino Daneri won the Second National Prize for Literature.* First Prize went to Dr. Aita;
Third Prize, to Dr. Mario Bonfanti. Unbelievably, my own
book The Sharper’s Cards
did not get a single vote. Once

* “I received your pained congratulations,” he wrote me. “You rage, my
poor friend, with envy, but you must confess—even if it chokes you!—that
this time I have crowned my cap with the reddest of feathers; my turban
with the most caliph of rubies.”
again dullness and envy had their triumph! It’s been some
time now that I’ve been trying to see Daneri; the gossip is
that a second selection of the poem is about to be published. His felicitous pen (no longer cluttered by the Aleph)
has now set itself the task of writing an epic on our national
hero, General San Martín.

I want to add two final observations: one, on the nature
of the Aleph; the other, on its name. As is well known, the
Aleph is the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet. Its use for
the strange sphere in my story may not be accidental. For
the Kabbalah, that letter stands for the En Soph, the pure
and boundless godhead; it is also said that it takes the
shape of a man pointing to both heaven and earth, in order
to show that the lower world is the map and mirror of the
higher; for Cantor’s Mengenlehre, it is the symbol of transfinite numbers, of which any part is as great as the whole.
I would like to know whether Carlos Argentino chose that
name or whether he read it—applied to another point where
all points converge—in one of the numberless texts that the
Aleph in his cellar revealed to him. Incredible as it may
seem, I believe that the Aleph of Garay Street was a false
Aleph.

Here are my reasons. Around 1867, Captain Burton
held the post of British Consul in Brazil. In July, 1942,
Pedro Henríquez Ureña came across a manuscript of Burton’s, in a library at Santos, dealing with the mirror which
the Oriental world attributes to Iskander Zu al-Karnayn, or
Alexander Bicornis of Macedonia. In its crystal the whole
world was reflected. Burton mentions other similar devices—
the sevenfold cup of Kai Kosru; the mirror that Tariq
ibn-Ziyad found in a tower (Thousand and One Nights,
272); the mirror that Lucian of Samosata examined on the
moon (True History, I, 26); the mirrorlike spear that the
first book of Capella’s Satyricon
attributes to Jupiter; Merlin’s universal mirror, which was “round and hollow . . . and
seem’d a world of glas” (The Faerie Queene, III, 2, 19)—
and adds this curious statement: “But the aforesaid objects
(besides the disadvantage of not existing) are mere optical
instruments. The Faithful who gather at the mosque of
Amr, in Cairo, are acquainted with the fact that the entire
universe lies inside one of the stone pillars that ring its
central court. . . . No one, of course, can actually see it, but
those who lay an ear against the surface tell that after some
short while they perceive its busy hum. . . . The mosque
dates from the seventh century; the pillars come from other
temples of pre-Islamic religions, since, as ibn-Khaldun has
written: ‘In nations founded by nomads, the aid of foreigners is essential in all concerning masonry.’ ”

Does this Aleph exist in the heart of a stone? Did I see it
there in the cellar when I saw all things, and have I now
forgotten it? Our minds are porous and forgetfulness seeps
in; I myself am distorting and losing, under the wearing
away of the years, the face of Beatriz.
Streetcorner Man

To Enrique Amorim
(1933)

Fancy your coming out and asking me, of all people, about
the late Francisco Real. Sure, I knew him, even though he
wasn’t from around here. He was a big shot on the Northside—that whole stretch from the Guadalupe pond to the old
Artillery Barracks. I never laid eyes on the guy above three
times and these three times were all the same night. But
nights like that you don’t forget. It was when La Lujanera
got it in her head to come around to my shack and bed down
with me, and Rosendo Juárez took off from the Maldonado
for good. Of course, you’re not the kind that name would
mean much to. But around Villa Santa Rita, Rosendo
Juárez—the Slasher we called him—had a reputation for
being pretty tough. He was one of don Nicolás Paredes’
boys, the same as Paredes was one of Morel’s gang, and
he’d earned respect for the way he handled a knife. Sharp
dresser too. Always rode up to the whorehouse on a dark
horse, his riding gear decked out with silver. There wasn’t a
man or dog around didn’t hold him in regard—and that goes
for the women as well. Everybody knew he had at least a
couple of killings to his name. He’d have on one of those
soft hats with a narrow brim and tall crown, and it would
sit there kind of cocky on his long thick hair he wore
slicked straight back. Lady luck smiled on him, like they
say, and around Villa all us younger guys used to ape him
even to the way he spit. But then one night we got a good
look at what this Rosendo was made of.

All this might seem made-up, but the story of what
happened that particular night starts when this flashy redwheeled buggy—jamful of men—comes barreling its way
down those hard-packed dirt roads out between the brick
kilns and the empty lots. Two guys in black were making a
big racket twanging away on guitars, and the driver kept
cracking his whip at the stray dogs snapping at the legs of
the horse. Sitting all quiet in the middle was one guy
wrapped in a poncho. This was the famous Butcher—he’d
picked that name up working in the stockyards—and he was
out for a good fight and maybe a killing. The night was
cool and welcome. A couple of them sat up on the folded
hood just like they were parading along some downtown
avenue in Carnival. A lot more things happened that night,
but it was only later on we got wind of this first part. Our
gang was there at Julia’s pretty early. This dance hall of
hers, between the Gauna road and the river, was really just
a big shed made out of sheets of corrugated iron. You could
spot the place from two or three blocks off either by the red
lamp hanging out front or by the rumpus. Julia, even
though she was a darkle, took trouble to run things right—
there was always plenty of fiddlers and good booze and
dancing partners ready to go all night But La Lujanera—
she was Rosendo’s woman—had the others all beat by a
mile. She’s dead now, and I can tell you years go by when I
don’t give her a thought anymore. But in her day you ought
to have seen her—what eyes she had! One look at her was
enough to make a man lose sleep.

The rum, the music, the women, Rosendo with that
rough
talk
pouring
out
of
his
mouth
and
a
slap
on
the
back
for each of us that I tried to take for a sign of real
friendship—the thing is, I was happy as they come. I was
lucky too. I had me a partner who could follow my steps
just like she knew ahead of time which way I was going to
turn. The tango took hold of us, driving us along and then
splitting us up and then bringing us back together again.
There we were in the middle of all this fun, like in some
kind of dream, when all of a sudden I feel the music sort of
getting louder. Turns out it was those two guitar pickers
riding in the buggy, coming closer and closer, their music
getting mixed up with ours. Then the breeze shifted, you
couldn’t hear them anymore, and my mind went back to
my own steps and my partner’s, and to the ins and outs of
the dance. A good half hour later there was this pounding
on the door and a big voice calling out like it could have
been the cops. Everything went silent. Then somebody out
there starts shouldering the door and the next thing we
know a guy busts in. Funny thing is he looked exactly like
his voice.

To us he wasn’t Francisco Real—not yet—but just some
big hefty guy. He was all in black from head to toe, except
for this reddish-brown scarf draped over one shoulder. I
remember his face. There was something Indian and kind
of angular about it.

When the door come flying in it smacked right into me.
Before I even knew what I was doing I was on top of the
guy, throwing him a left square in the teeth while my right
goes inside my vest for my knife. But I never got a chance.
Steadying himself, he puts his arms out and shoves me
aside like he’s brushing something out of the way. There I
was down on my ass—back of him now—my hand still inside
the jacket grabbing for the knife. And him wading forward
like nothing happened. Just wading forward, a whole head
taller than all these guys he’s pushing his way through—and
acting like he never even saw them. The first of our guys—
bunch of gaping wops—just back out of his way, scared as
hell. But only the first. In the next bunch the Redhead was
waiting for him, and before the newcomer could lay a hand
on his shoulder, Red’s knife was out and he let him have
one across the face with the flat of the blade. Soon as they
saw that they all jumped the guy. The hall was pretty long,
maybe more than nine or ten yards, and they drove him
from one end almost to the other—like Christ in one of the
Stations—roughing him up, hooting at him, spitting all over
him. First they let him have it with their fists, then, seeing
he didn’t bother shielding the blows, they started slapping
him openhanded and flicking the fringes of their scarves at
him, mocking him. At the same time they were saving him
for Rosendo, who all this time was standing with his back
against the far wall and not moving a muscle, not saying a
word. All he did was puff on his cigarette, a little worriedlooking, like he already knew what came clear to the rest of
us only later on. The Butcher, who was hanging on but was
beginning to bleed here and there—that whole hooting pack
behind him—got pushed closer and closer to Rosendo.
Laughed at, lashed at, spit on, he only started talking when
the two of them came face to face. Then he looked at
Rosendo and, wiping his face on his sleeve, said something
like this:

“I’m Francisco Real and I come from the Northside.
People call me the Butcher. I let all these punks lay their
hands on me just now because what I’m looking for is a
man. Word’s going around there’s someone out in these
lousy mudflats supposed to be pretty good with a knife.
They call him the Slasher and they say he’s pretty tough.
I’d like to meet up with the guy. Maybe he can teach a
nobody like me how a man with guts handles himself.”

He had his say looking straight at Rosendo, and all at
once this big knife he must have had up his sleeve was
flashing in his hand. Instead of pressing in, now everyone
starts opening up space for a fight—at the same time staring
at the two of them in dead silence. Even the thick lips of
the blind nigger playing the fiddle were turned that way.

Right then I hear this commotion behind me and in the
frame of the door I get me a glimpse of six or seven men
who must have been the Butcher’s gang. The oldest, a
leathery-faced guy with a big gray moustache, who looked
like a hick, comes in a few steps and, going all goggle-eyed
at the women and the lights, takes off his hat, respectful.
The rest of them kept their eyes peeled, ready to swing into
action if anything underhanded went on.

What was the matter with Rosendo all this time, not
bouncing that loudmouth the hell out? He was still keeping
quiet, not even raising his eyes. I don’t know if he spit his
cigarette out or if it fell from his mouth. Finally he manages to come up with a couple of words, but so low the rest
of us at the other end of the dance floor didn’t get what he
said. Francisco Real challenged him again, and again Rosendo refused. At this point, the youngest of the newcomers
lets out a whistle. La Lujanera gave the guy a look that went
right through him. Then, her hair swinging down over her
shoulders, she wedged her way through the crowd and, going
up to her man, slips his knife out and hands it to him.

“Rosendo,” she says to him, “I think you’re going to
need this.”

Way up under the roof was this kind of long window that
opened out over the river. Rosendo took the knife in his
two hands and turned it over like he never laid eyes on it
before. Then all of a sudden he raises his arms up over his
head and flips the knife behind him out the window into
the Maldonado. I felt a chill go through me.

“The only reason I don’t carve you up is cause you
sicken me,” the Butcher says then, making to let Rosendo
have it. That split second La Lujanera threw her arms
around the Butcher’s neck, giving him one of those looks of
hers, and says to him, mad as hell, “Let the bastard alone—
making us think he was a man.”

For a minute Francisco Real couldn’t figure it out. Then
wrapping his arms around her like it was forever, he calls to
the musicians to play loud and strong and orders the rest of
us to dance. The music went like wildfire from one end of
the hall to the other. Real danced sort of stiff but held his
partner up tight, and in nothing flat he had her charmed.
When they got near the door he shouted, “Make way, boys,
she’s
all mine now!” and out they went, cheek to cheek,
like the tango was floating them off.

I must have turned a little red with shame. I took a
couple of turns with some woman, then dropped her cold.
On account of the heat and the jam, I told her, then edged
my way around the room toward the door. It was a nice
night out—but for who? There was their buggy at the corner
of the alley with two guitars standing straight up on the
seat like men. Boy, it galled me seeing that—it was as much
as saying we weren’t even good enough to clip a lousy
guitar. The thought that we were a bunch of nobodys really
had me burned up, and I snatched the carnation from
behind my ear and threw it in a puddle. I stood there a
while staring at it, trying to take my mind off things. I
wished it was already tomorrow—I wished that night were
over. Then the next thing I knew there’s this elbow shoving
me aside and it almost came like a relief. It was Rosendo—
all by himself, slinking off.

“You’re always getting in the way, kid,” he says to me
half snarling. I couldn’t tell if he was just getting something
off his chest or what. He disappeared in the dark toward
the Maldonado. I never laid eyes on him again.

I stood there looking at the things I’d seen all my
life—the big wide sky, the river going on down there in its
own blind way, a horse half asleep, the dirt roads, the
kilns—and it came to me that in the middle of this ragweed
and all these dump heaps and this whole stinking place, I’d
grown up just another weed myself. What else was going to
come out of this crap but us—lots of lip but soft inside, all
talk but no standing up to anyone? Then I thought no, the
worse the neighborhood the tougher it had to be. Crap?
Back toward the dance hall the music was still going
strong, and on the breeze came a smell of honeysuckle.
Nice night, but so what? There were so many stars, some
right on top of others, it made you dizzy just looking at
them. I tried hard to tell myself that what happened meant
nothing to me, but I just couldn’t get over Rosendo’s yellow
streak
and
the
newcomer’s
plain
guts.
Real
even
managed
to
get hold of a woman for the night—for that night and a lot
of nights and maybe forever, I thought, because La Lujanera
was really something. God knows which way they headed.
They couldn’t have wandered very far. By then the two of
them were probably going at it in some ditch.

When I got back, the dance was in full swing. I slipped
into the crowd, quiet as I could, noticing that some of our
boys had taken off and that the Northside bunch were
dancing along with everyone else. There was no shoving, no
rough stuff. Everybody was watching out and on good
behavior. The music sounded sleepy, and the girls tangoing
away with the outsiders didn’t have much to say.

I was on the lookout for something, but not for what
happened. Outside there were sounds of a woman crying
and then that voice we all knew by then—but real low,
almost too low, like somehow it didn’t belong to anyone
anymore.

“Go on in, you slut,” it was telling her—then more tears.
After that the voice sounded desperate.
“Open the door, you understand me? Open it, you lousy
tramp. Open it, bitch.”
At that point the shaky door opens and in comes La
Lujanera, all alone. Just like someone’s herding her.
“Must be a ghost out there behind her,” said the Redhead.

“A dead man, friend.” It was the Butcher, and he staggers in, his face like a drunk’s, and in the space we opened
up for him he takes a couple of reeling steps—tall, hardly
seeing—then all at once goes down like a log. One of his
friends rolled him over and fixed him a pillow with his
scarf, but all this fussing only got him smeared with blood.
We could see there was a big gash in his chest. The blood
was welling up and blackening a bright red neckerchief I
hadn’t noticed before because his scarf covered it. For first
aid one of the women brought rum and some scorched rags.
The man was in no shape to explain. La Lujanera looked at
him in a daze, her arms hanging by her sides. There was
one question on everyone’s face and finally she got out an
answer. She said after leaving with the Butcher they went
to a little field and at that point someone she didn’t know
turned up and challenged him to fight and then gave him
this stab. She swore she didn’t know who it was, but that it
wasn’t Rosendo. Was anyone going to believe that?

The man at our feet was dying. It looked to me like the
hand that done the job done it well. Just the same, the man
hung on. When he knocked that second time Julia was
brewing some matés. The cup went clear around the circle
and back to me before he died. When the end came, he said
in a low voice, “Cover my face.” All he had left was pride
and he didn’t want us gaping at him while his face went
through its agony. Someone put his hat over him and that’s
how he died—without a sound—under that high black crown.
It was only when his chest stopped heaving they dared
uncover him. He had that worn-out look dead men have. In
his day, from the Artillery Barracks all the way to the
Southside, he was one of the scrappiest men around. When
I knew he was dead and couldn’t talk, I stopped hating
him.

“All it takes to die is being alive,” says one of the girls in
the crowd. And in the same way another one says, “A man’s
so full of pride and now look—all he’s good for is gathering
flies.”

Right then the Northside gang starts talking to each
other in low voices. Then two of them come out together
saying, “The woman killed him.” After that, in a real loud
voice, one of them threw the accusation in her face, and
they all swarmed in around her. Forgetting I had to be
careful, I was on them like a light. I don’t know what kept
me from reaching for my knife. There were a lot of eyes
watching—maybe everybody’s—and I said, putting them
down, “Look at this woman’s hands. How could she get the
strength of the nerve to knife a man?”

Then, kind of offhand, I added, “Whoever would have
dreamed the deceased, who—like they say—was a pretty
tough guy in his own neck of the woods, would end up this
way? And in a place sleepy as this, where nothing ever
happens till some outsider comes around trying to show us
a little fun and for all his pains only gets himself spit on?”

Nobody offered his hide for a whipping.

Right then, in the dead silence, you could make out the
approach of riders. It was the law. Everybody—some more,
some less—had his own good reason for staying clear of the
police. The best thing was to dump the body in the Maldonado. You remember that long window the knife went
flying out of? Well, that’s where the man in black went. A
bunch of guys lifted him up. There were hands stripping
him of every cent and trinket he had, and someone even
hacked off one of his fingers to steal his ring. They helped
themselves, all right—real daring bunch with a poor defenseless stiff once a better guy already straightened him out.
One good heave and the current did the rest. To keep him
from floating, they maybe even tore out his guts. I don’t
know—I didn’t want to look. The old-timer with the gray
moustache never took his eyes off me. Making the best of
all the commotion, La Lujanera slipped away.

When the lawmen came in for a look, the dance was
going good again. That blind fiddler could really scrape
some lively numbers on that violin of his—the kind of thing
you never hear anymore. It was beginning to get light
outside. The fence posts on a nearby slope seemed to stand
alone, the strands of wire still invisible in the early dawn.

Nice and easy, I walked the two or three blocks back to
my shack. A candle was burning in the window, then all at
once went out. Let me tell you, I hurried when I saw that.
Then, Borges, I put my hand inside my vest—here by the
left armpit where I always carry it—and took my knife out
again. I turned the blade over, real slow. It was as good as
new, innocent-looking, and you couldn’t see the slightest
trace of blood on it.
The Approach to
al-Mu’tasim

(1935)

Philip Guedalla informs us that the novel The Approach to
al-Mu’tasim
by the Bombay barrister Mir Bahadur Ali “is
a rather uneasy combination of those Islamic allegories
which never fail to impress their own translators, and of
that brand of detective stories which inevitably outdoes
even Dr. Watson and heightens the horror of human life as
it is found in the most respectable boardinghouses of
Brighton.” Before him, Mr. Cecil Roberts had blasted
Bahadur’s book for “its unaccountable double influence of
Wilkie Collins and of the famed twelfth-century Persian,
Ferid Eddin Attar”—a simple enough observation which
Guedalla merely parrots, though in a more angry jargon.
Essentially, both reviewers are in agreement, pointing out
the book’s detective-story mechanism and its undercurrent
of mysticism. This hybridization may lead us to suspect a
certain kinship with Chesterton; we shall presently find
out, however, that no such affinity exists.

The first edition of The Approach to al-Mu’tasim
ap
peared in Bombay toward the end of 1932. The paper on
which the volume was issued, I am told, was almost newsprint; the jacket announced to the purchaser that the book
was the first detective novel to be written by a native oí
Bombay City. Within a few months, four printings of a thousand copies each were sold out. The Bombay Quarterly
Review, the Bombay Gazette, the Calcutta Review, the
Hindustani Review
(of Allahabad), and the Calcutta Englishman
all sang its praises. Bahadur then brought out an
illustrated edition, which he retitled The Conversation with
the Man Called al-Mu’tasim
and rather beautifully subtitled A Game with Shifting Mirrors. This is the edition
which Victor Gollancz has just reissued in London, with a
foreword by Dorothy L. Sayers and the omission—perhaps
merciful—of the illustrations. It is this edition that I have
at hand; I have not been able to obtain a copy of the
earlier one, which I surmise may be a better book. I am led
to this suspicion by an appendix summarizing the differences between the 1932 and the 1934 editions. Before
attempting a discussion of the novel, it might be well to
give some idea of the general plot.

Its central figure—whose name we are never told—is a law
student in Bombay. Blasphemously, he disbelieves in the
Islamic faith of his fathers, but on the tenth night of the
moon of Muharram, he finds himself in the midst of a civil
disorder between Muslims and Hindus. It is a night of
drums and prayers. Among the mob of the heathen, the
great paper canopies of the Muslim procession force their
way. A hail of Hindu bricks flies down from a roof terrace.
A knife is sunk into a belly. Someone—Muslim? Hindu?—
dies and is trampled on. Three thousand men are fighting—
stick against revolver, obscenity against curse, God the Indivisible against the many Gods. Instinctively, the student
freethinker joins in the fighting. With his bare hands, he
kills (or thinks he has killed) a Hindu. The Government
police—mounted, thunderous, and barely awake—intervene,
dealing impartial whiplashes. The student flees, almost under the legs of the horses, heading for the farthest ends of
The Approach to al-Mu’tasim

town. He crosses two sets of railroad tracks, or the same
tracks twice. He scales the wall of an unkempt garden at
one corner of which rises a circular tower. “A lean and evil
mob of mooncoloured hounds” lunges at him from the
black rosebushes. Pursued, he seeks refuge in the tower. He
climbs an iron ladder—two or three rungs are missing—and
on the fiat roof, which has a blackish pit in the middle,
comes upon a squalid man in a squatting position, urinating
vigorously by the light of the moon. The man confides to
him that his profession is stealing gold teeth from the
white-shrouded corpses that the Parsis leave on the roof of
the tower. He says a number of other vile things and
mentions, in passing, that fourteen nights have lapsed since
he last cleansed himself with buffalo dung. He speaks with
obvious anger of a band of horse thieves from Gujarat,
“eaters of dogs and lizards—men, in short, as abominable as
the two of us.” Day is dawning. In the air there is a low
flight of well-fed vultures. The student, in utter exhaustion,
lies down to sleep. When he wakes up, the sun is high overhead and the thief is gone. Gone also are a couple of Trichinopoly cigars and a few silver rupees. Threatened by the
events of the night before, the student decides to lose
himself somewhere within the bounds of India. He knows
he has shown himself capable of killing an infidel, but not
of knowing with certainty whether the Muslim is more justified in his beliefs than the infidel. The name of Gujarat
haunts him, and also the name of a malka-sansi
(a woman
belonging to a caste of thieves) from Palanpur, many times
favored by the curses and hatred of the despoiler of
corpses. He reasons that the anger of a man so thoroughly
vile is in itself a kind of praise. He resolves—though rather
hopelessly—to find her. He prays and sets out slowly and
deliberately on his long journey. So ends the novel’s second
chapter.

It is hardly possible to outline here the involved adventures that befall him in the remaining nineteen. There is a
baffling pullulation of dramatis personae, to say nothing of a
biography that seems to exhaust the range of the human
spirit (running from infamy to mathematical speculation)
or of a pilgrimage that covers the vast geography of India.
The story begun in Bombay moves on into the lowlands of
Palanpur, lingers for an evening and a night before the
stone gates of Bikaner, tells of the death of a blind astrologer in a sewer of Benares; the hero takes part in a conspiracy in a mazelike palace in Katmandu, prays and fornicates in the pestilential stench of the Machua Bazaar in
Calcutta, sees the day born out of the sea from a law office
in Madras, sees evenings die in the sea from a balcony in
the state of Travancore, falters and kills in Indapur. The
adventure closes its orbit of miles and years back in Bombay itself, only steps away from the garden of the “mooncoloured hounds.” The underlying plot is this: a man, the
fugitive student freethinker we already know, falls among
the lowest class of people and, in a kind of contest of
evildoing, takes up their ways. All at once, with the wonder
and terror of Robinson Crusoe upon discovering the footprint of a man in the sand, he becomes aware of a brief and
sudden change in that world of ruthlessness—a certain tenderness, a moment of happiness, a forgiving silence in one
of his loathsome companions. “It was as though a stranger,
a third and more subtle person, had entered into the conversation.” The hero knows that the scoundrel with whom
he is talking is quite incapable of this sudden turn; from
this, he guesses that the man is echoing someone else, a
friend, or the friend of a friend. Rethinking the problem, he
arrives at the mysterious conclusion that “somewhere on
the face of the earth is a man from whom this light has
emanated; somewhere on the face of the earth there exists
a man who is equal to this light.” The student decides to
spend his life in search of him.

The story’s outline is now plain: the untiring search for a
human soul through the barely perceptible reflections cast
by this soul in others—in the beginning, the faint trace of a
smile or a single word; in the end, the differing and branching splendors of reason, of the imagination, and of righteousness. The nearer to al-Mu’tasim the men he examines
are, the greater is their share of the divine, though it is
understood that they are but mirrors. A mathematical analogy may be helpful here. Bahadur’s populous novel is an
ascendant progression whose last term is the foreshadowed
“man called al-Mu’tasim.” Al-Mu’tasim’s immediate predecessor is a Persian bookseller of striking happiness and
politeness; the man before the bookseller, a saint. Finally,
after many years, the student comes to a corridor “at whose
end is a door and a cheap beaded curtain, and behind the
curtain a shining light.” The student claps his hands once
or twice and asks for al-Mu’tasim. A man’s voice—the unimaginable voice of al-Mu’tasim—prays him to enter. The
student parts the curtain and steps forward. At this point the
novel comes to its end.

If I am not mistaken, the proper handling of such a plot
places the writer under two obligations. One, to abound
richly in prophetic touches; the other, to make us feel that
the person foreshadowed by these touches is more than a
mere convention or phantom. Bahadur fulfills the first; how
far he achieves the second, I wonder. In other words, the
unheard and unseen al-Mu’tasim should leave us with the
impression of a real character, not of a clutter of insipid
superlatives. In the 1932 version, there are but few supernatural traces; “the man called al-Mu’tasim” is obviously a
symbol, though certain personal traits are not lacking. Unfortunately, this literary good conduct did not last. In the
1934 version—the one I have read—the novel declines into
allegory. Al-Mu’tasim is God and the hero’s various wanderings are in some way the journey of a soul on its ascending steps toward the divine union. There are a few regrettable details: a black Jew from Cochin speaks of
al-Mu’tasim as having dark skin; a Christian describes him
standing on a height with his arms spread open; a Red
lama recalls him seated “like that image of yak butter that
I modeled and worshiped in the monastery of Tachilhunpo.” These statements seem to suggest a single God who
reconciles himself to the many varieties of mankind. In my
opinion, the idea is not greatly exciting. I will not say the
same of another idea—the hint that the Almighty is also in
search of Someone, and that Someone of Someone above
him (or Someone simply indispensable and equal), and so
on to the End (or rather, Endlessness) of Time, or perhaps
cyclically. Al-Mu’tasim (the name of that eighth Abbasid
caliph who was victorious in eight battles, fathered eight
sons and eight daughters, left eight thousand slaves, and
ruled for a period of eight years, eight moons, and eight
days) means etymologically “The Seeker after Help.” In
the 1932 version, the fact that the object of the pilgrimage
was himself a pilgrim justified well enough the difficulty of
finding him. The later version gives way to the quaint
theology I have just spoken of. In the twentieth chapter,
words attributed by the Persian bookseller to al-Mu’tasim
are, perhaps, the mere heightening of others spoken by the
hero; this and other hidden analogies may stand for the
identity of the Seeker with the Sought. They may also
stand for an influence of Man on the Divinity. Another
chapter hints that al-Mu’tasim is the Hindu the student
believes he has killed. Mir Bahadur Ali, as we have seen,
cannot refrain from the grossest temptation of art—that of
being a genius.

On reading over these pages, I fear I have not called
sufficient attention to the book’s many virtues. It includes
a number of fine distinctions. For example, a conversation
in chapter nineteen in which one of the speakers, who is a
friend of al-Mu’tasim, avoids pointing out the other man’s
sophisms “in order not to be obviously in the right.”

It is considered admirable nowadays for a modern book
to have its roots in an ancient one, since nobody (as Dr.
Johnson said) likes owing anything to his contemporaries.
The many but superficial contacts between Joyce’s Ulysses
and Homer’s Odyssey
go on receiving—I shall never know
why—the harebrained admiration of critics. The points of
contact between Bahadur’s novel and the celebrated Parliament
of Birds
by Farid ud-Din Attar, have awakened the
no less mysterious approval of London, and even of Allahabad and Calcutta. As far as I can judge, the points of
contact between the two works are not many. Other sources
are present. Some inquisitor has listed certain analogies
between the novel’s opening scene and Kipling’s story “On
the City Wall.” Bahadur admits this, but argues that it
would be highly abnormal if two descriptions of the tenth
night of Muharram were quite unlike each other. Eliot,
more to the point, is reminded of the seventy cantos of the
unfinished allegory The Faerie Queene, in which the heroine, Gloriana, does not appear even once—a fault previously
noted
by
Richard
William
Church
(Spenser,
1879). With due humility, I suggest a distant and possible forerunner, the Jerusalem Kabbalist Isaac Luria, who
in the sixteenth century advanced the notion that the soul
of an ancestor or a master may, in order to comfort or
instruct him, enter into the soul of someone who has
suffered misfortune. Ibbür
is the name given to this variety
of metempsychosis.*

* In the course of this review, I have referred to the Mantiq ut-Tair
(Parliament of Birds) by the Persian mystic Farid al-Din Abu Talib Mohammad ibn-Ibraham Attar, who was killed by the soldiers of Tului, one of
Genghis Khan’s sons, during the sack of Nishapur. Perhaps it would be
useful to summarize the poem. The distant king of birds, the Simurgh,
drops one of his splendid feathers somewhere in the middle of China; on
learning of this, the other birds, tired of their age-old anarchy, decide to
seek him. They know that the king’s name means “thirty birds”; they know
that his castle lies in the Kaf, the range of mountains that ring the earth.
Setting out on the almost endless adventure, they cross seven valleys or seas,
the next to last bearing the name Bewilderment, the last, the name Annihilation. Many of the pilgrims desert; the journey takes its toll among the
rest. Thirty, made pure by their sufferings, reach the great peak of the
Simurgh. At last they behold him; they realize that they are the Simurgh
and that the Simurgh is each of them and all of them. (Plotinus [Enneads,
V, 8, 4] also states a divine extension of the principle of identity: “All things
in the intelligible heavens are in all places. Any one thing is all other things.
The sun is all the stars, and each star is all the other stars and the sun.”)
The Mantiq ut-Tair
has been translated into French by Garcin de Tassy;
parts of it into English by Edward FitzGerald. For this footnote, I have
consulted the tenth volume of Burton’s Arabian Nights
and Margaret
Smith’s study The Persian Mystics: Attar (1932).
The Circular Ruins

(1940)

And if he left off dreaming about you. . . .
Through the Looking-Glass, IV

Nobody saw him come ashore in the encompassing night,
nobody saw the bamboo craft run aground in the sacred
mud, but within a few days everyone knew that the quiet
man had come from the south and that his home was
among the numberless villages upstream on the steep slopes
of the mountain, where the Zend language is barely tainted
by Greek and where lepers are rare. The fact is that the
gray man pressed his lips to the mud, scrambled up the
bank without parting (perhaps without feeling) the brushy
thorns that tore his flesh, and dragged himself, faint and
bleeding, to the circular opening watched over by a stone
tiger, or horse, which once was the color of fire and is now
the color of ash. This opening is a temple which was
destroyed ages ago by flames, which the swampy wilderness
later desecrated, and whose god no longer receives the
reverence of men. The stranger laid himself down at the
foot of the image.

Wakened by the sun high overhead, he noticed—somehow
without amazement—that his wounds had healed. He shut
his pale eyes and slept again, not because of weariness but
because he willed it. He knew that this temple was the
place he needed for his unswerving purpose; he knew that
downstream the encroaching trees had also failed to choke
the ruins of another auspicious temple with its own fireravaged, dead gods; he knew that his first duty was to
sleep. Along about midnight, he was awakened by the
forlorn call of a bird. Footprints, some figs, and a water jug
told him that men who lived nearby had looked on his sleep
with a kind of awe and either sought his protection or else
were in dread of his witchcraft. He felt the chill of fear and
searched the crumbling walls for a burial niche, where he
covered himself over with leaves he had never seen before.

His guiding purpose, though it was supernatural, was not
impossible. He wanted to dream a man; he wanted to
dream him down to the last detail and project him into the
world of reality. This mystical aim had taxed the whole
range of his mind. Had anyone asked him his own name or
anything about his life before then, he would not have
known what to answer. This forsaken, broken temple suited
him because it held few visible things, and also because the
neighboring villagers would look after his frugal needs. The
rice and fruit of their offerings were nourishment enough
for his body, whose one task was to sleep and to dream.

At the outset, his dreams were chaotic; later on, they
were of a dialectic nature. The stranger dreamed himself at
the center of a circular amphitheater which in some way
was also the burnt-out temple. Crowds of silent disciples
exhausted the tiers of seats; the faces of the farthest of
them hung centuries away from him and at a height of the
stars, but their features were clear and exact. The man
lectured on anatomy, cosmography, and witchcraft. The
faces listened, bright and eager, and did their best to
answer sensibly, as if they felt the importance of his questions, which would raise one of them out of an existence as
a shadow and place him in the real world. Whether asleep
or awake, the man pondered the answers of his phantoms
and, not letting himself be misled by impostors, divined in
certain of their quandaries a growing intelligence. He was
in search of a soul worthy of taking a place in the world.

After nine or ten nights he realized, feeling bitter over it,
that nothing could be expected from those pupils who
passively accepted his teaching, but that he might, however, hold hopes for those who from time to time hazarded
reasonable doubts about what he taught. The former,
although they deserved love and affection, could never
become real; the latter, in their dim way, were already real.
One evening (now his evenings were also given over to
sleeping, now he was only awake for an hour or two at
dawn) he dismissed his vast dream-school forever and kept
a single disciple. He was a quiet, sallow, and at times
rebellious young man with sharp features akin to those of
his dreamer. The sudden disappearance of his fellow pupils
did not disturb him for very long, and his progress, at the
end of a few private lessons, amazed his teacher. Nonetheless, a catastrophe intervened. One day, the man emerged
from his sleep as from a sticky wasteland, glanced up at
the faint evening light, which at first he confused with
the dawn, and realized that he had not been dreaming.
All that night and the next day, the hideous lucidity of
insomnia weighed down on him. To tire himself out he tried
to explore the surrounding forest, but all he managed, there
in a thicket of hemlocks, were some snatches of broken
sleep, fleetingly tinged with visions of a crude and worthless
nature. He tried to reassemble his school, and barely had
he uttered a few brief words of counsel when the whole
class went awry and vanished. In his almost endless wakefulness, tears of anger stung his old eyes.

He realized that, though he may penetrate all the riddles
of the higher and lower orders, the task of shaping the
senseless and dizzying stuff of dreams is the hardest that a
man can attempt—much harder than weaving a rope of sand
or of coining the faceless wind. He realized that an initial
failure was to be expected. He then swore he would forget
the populous vision which in the beginning had led him
astray, and he sought another method. Before attempting
it, he spent a month rebuilding the strength his fever had
consumed. He gave up all thoughts of dreaming and almost
at once managed to sleep a reasonable part of the day. The
few times he dreamed during this period he did not dwell
on his dreams. Before taking up his task again, he waited
until the moon was a perfect circle. Then, in the evening, he
cleansed himself in the waters of the river, worshiped the
gods of the planets, uttered the prescribed syllables of an
all-powerful name, and slept. Almost at once, he had a dream
of a beating heart.

He dreamed it throbbing, warm, secret. It was the size of
a closed fist, a darkish red in the dimness of a human body
still without a face or sex. With anxious love he dreamed it
for fourteen lucid nights. Each night he perceived it more
clearly. He did not touch it, but limited himself to witnessing it, to observing it, to correcting it now and then with a
look. He felt it, he lived it from different distances and
from many angles. On the fourteenth night he touched the
pulmonary artery with a finger and then the whole heart,
inside and out. The examination satisfied him. For one
night he deliberately did not dream; after that he went
back to the heart again, invoked the name of a planet, and
set out to envision another of the principal organs. Before a
year was over he came to the skeleton, the eyelids. The
countless strands of hair were perhaps the hardest task of
all. He dreamed a whole man, a young man, but the young
man could not stand up or speak, nor could he open his
eyes. Night after night, the man dreamed him asleep.

In the cosmogonies of the Gnostics, the demiurges mold a
red Adam who is unable to stand on his feet; as clumsy and
crude and elementary as that Adam of dust was the Adam
of dreams wrought by the nights of the magician. One
evening the man was at the point of destroying all his
handiwork (it would have been better for him had he done
so), but in the end he restrained himself. Having exhausted
his prayers to the gods of the earth and river, he threw
himself down at the feet of the stone image that may have
been a tiger or a stallion, and asked for its blind aid. That
same evening he dreamed of the image. He dreamed it
alive, quivering; it was no unnatural cross between tiger
and stallion but at one and the same time both these
violent creatures and also a bull, a rose, a thunderstorm.
This manifold god revealed to him that its earthly name
was Fire, that there in the circular temple (and in others
like it) sacrifices had once been made to it, that it had been
worshiped, and that through its magic the phantom of the
man’s dreams would be wakened to life in such a way
that—except for Fire itself and the dreamer—every being in
the world would accept him as a man of flesh and blood.
The god ordered that, once instructed in the rites, the
disciple should be sent downstream to the other ruined
temple, whose pyramids still survived, so that in that
abandoned place some human voice might exalt him. In the
dreamer’s dream, the dreamed one awoke.

The magician carried out these orders. He devoted a
period of time (which finally spanned two years) to initiating his principle into the riddles of the universe and the
worship of Fire. Deep inside, it pained him to say goodbye
to his creature. Under the pretext of teaching him more
fully, each day he drew out the hours set aside for sleep.
Also, he reshaped the somewhat faulty right shoulder. From
time to time, he was troubled by the feeling that all this
had already happened, but for the most part his days were
happy. On closing his eyes he would think, “Now I will be
with my son.” Or, less frequently, “The son I have begotten
awaits me and he will not exist if I do not go to him.”

Little by little, he was training the young man for reality.
On one occasion he commanded him to set up a flag on a
distant peak. The next day, there on the peak, a fiery
pennant shone. He tried other, similar exercises, each bolder
than the one before. He realized with a certain bitterness
that his son was ready—and perhaps impatient—to be born.
That night he kissed him for the first time and sent him
down the river to the other temple, whose whitened ruins
were still to be glimpsed over miles and miles of impenetrable forest and swamp. At the very end (so that the boy
would never know he was a phantom, so that he would think
himself a man like all men), the magician imbued his
disciple with total oblivion of his long years of apprenticeship.

His triumph and his peace were blemished by a touch of
weariness. In the morning and evening dusk, he prostrated
himself before the stone idol, perhaps imagining that his
unreal son was performing the same rites farther down the
river in other circular ruins. At night he no longer dreamed,
or else he dreamed the way all men dream. He now perceived with a certain vagueness the sounds and shapes of
the world, for his absent son was taking nourishment from
the magician’s decreasing consciousness. His life’s purpose
was fulfilled; the man lived on in a kind of ecstasy. After a
length of time that certain tellers of the story count in
years and others in half-decades, he was awakened one
midnight by two rowers. He could not see their faces, but
they spoke to him about a magic man in a temple up north
who walked on fire without being burned. The magician
suddenly remembered the god’s words. He remembered that
of all the creatures in the world, Fire was the only one who
knew his son was a phantom. This recollection, comforting
at first, ended by tormenting him. He feared that his son
might wonder at this strange privilege and in some way
discover his condition as a mere appearance. Not to be a
man but to be the projection of another man’s dreams—what
an unparalleled humiliation, how bewildering! Every father
cares for the child he has begotten—he has allowed—in some
moment of confusion or happiness. It is understandable,
then, that the magician should fear for the future of a son
thought out organ by organ and feature by feature over the
course of a thousand and one secret nights.

The end of these anxieties came suddenly, but certain
signs foretold it. First (after a long drought), a far-off cloud
on a hilltop, as light as a bird; next, toward the south, the
sky, which took on the rosy hue of a leopard’s gums; then,
the pillars of smoke that turned the metal of the nights to
rust; finally, the headlong panic of the forest animals. For
what had happened many centuries ago was happening
again. The ruins of the fire god’s shrine were destroyed by
fire. In a birdless dawn the magician saw the circling sheets
of fíame closing in on him. For a moment, he thought of
taking refuge in the river, but then he realized that death
was coming to crown his years and to release him from his
labors. He walked into the leaping pennants of flame. They
did not bite into his flesh, but caressed him and flooded him
without heat or burning. In relief, in humiliation, in terror,
he understood that he, too, was an appearance, that someone else was dreaming him.
Death and the
Compass

To Mandie Molina Vedia
(1942)

Of the many problems ever to tax Erik Lönnrot’s rash mind,
none was so strange—so methodically strange, let us say—as
the intermittent series of murders which came to a culmination amid the incessant odor of eucalyptus trees at the villa
Triste-le-Roy. It is true that Lönnrot failed to prevent the
last of the murders, but it is undeniable that he foresaw it.
Neither did he guess the identity of Yarmolinsky’s illstarred killer, but he did guess the secret shape of the evil
series of events and the possible role played in those events
by Red Scharlach, also nicknamed Scharlach the Dandy.
The gangster (like so many others of his ilk) had sworn on
his honor to get Erik Lönnrot, but Lönnrot was not intimidated. Lönnrot thought of himself as a pure logician, a
kind of Auguste Dupin, but there was also a streak of the
adventurer and even of the gambler in him.

The first murder took place in the Hôtel du Nord—that
tall prism which overlooks the estuary whose broad waters
are
the
color
of
sand.
To
that
tower
(which,
as
everyone
knows, brings together the hateful blank white walls of a
hospital, the numbered chambers of a cell block, and the
overall appearance of a brothel) there arrived on the third
of December Rabbi Marcel Yarmolinsky, a gray-bearded,
gray-eyed man, who was a delegate from Podolsk to the
Third Talmudic Congress. We shall never know whether
the Hôtel du Nord actually pleased him or not, since he
accepted it with the ageless resignation that had made it
possible for him to survive three years of war in the
Carpathians and three thousand years of oppression and
pogroms. He was given a room on floor R, across from the
suite occupied—not without splendor—by the Tetrarch of
Galilee.

Yarmolinsky had dinner, put off until the next day a tour
of the unfamiliar city, arranged in a closet his many books
and his few suits of clothes, and before midnight turned off
his bed lamp. (So said the Tetrarch’s chauffeur, who slept
in the room next door.) On the fourth of December, at
three minutes past eleven in the morning, an editor of the
Jüdische Zeitung
called him by telephone. Rabbi Yarmolinsky did not answer; soon after, he was found in his
room, his face already discolored, almost naked under a
great old-fashioned cape. He lay not far from the hall door.
A deep knife wound had opened his chest. A couple of
hours later, in the same room, in the throng of reporters,
photographers, and policemen, Inspector Treviranus and
Lönnrot quietly discussed the case.

“We needn’t lose any time here looking for three-legged
cats,” Treviranus said, brandishing an imperious cigar.
“Everyone knows the Tetrarch of Galilee owns the world’s
finest sapphires. Somebody out to steal them probably
found his way in here by mistake. Yarmolinsky woke up
and the thief was forced to kill him. What do you make of
it?”

“Possible, but not very interesting,” Lönnrot answered.
“You’ll say reality is under no obligation to be interesting.
To which I’d reply that reality may disregard the obligation but that we may not. In your hypothesis, chance plays a
large part. Here’s a dead rabbi. I’d much prefer a purely
rabbinical explanation, not the imagined mistakes of an
imagined jewel thief.”

“I’m not interested in rabbinical explanations,” Treviranus replied in bad humor; “I’m interested in apprehending the man who murdered this unknown party.”

“Not so unknown,” corrected Lönnrot. “There are his
complete works.” He pointed to a row of tall books on a
shelf in the closet. There were a Vindication of the Kabbalah,
a Study of the Philosophy of Robert Fludd, a literal
translation of the Sefer Yeçirah, a Biography of the Baal
Shem, a History of the Hasidic Sect, a treatise (in German) on the Tetragrammaton, and another on the names of
God in the Pentateuch. The Inspector stared at them in
fear, almost in disgust. Then he burst into laughter.

“I’m only a poor Christian,” he said. “You may cart off
every last tome if you feel like it. I have no time to waste
on Jewish superstitions.”

“Maybe this crime belongs to the history of Jewish
superstitions,” Lönnrot grumbled.

“Like Christianity,” the editor from the Jüdische Zeitung
made bold to add. He was nearsighted, an atheist, and very
shy.

Nobody took any notice of him. One of the police detectives had found in Yarmolinsky’s small typewriter a sheet
of paper on which these cryptic words were written:

The first letter of the Name has been uttered

Lönnrot restrained himself from smiling. Suddenly turning
bibliophile and Hebraic scholar, he ordered a package made
of the dead man’s books and he brought them to his
apartment. There, with complete disregard for the police
investigation, he began studying them. One royal-octavo
volume revealed to him the teachings of Israel Baal Shem
Tobh, founder of the sect of the Pious; another, the magic
and the terror of the Tetragrammaton, which is God’s
unspeakable name; a third, the doctrine that God has a
secret
name
in
which
(as
in
the
crystal
sphere
that
the
Persians attribute to Alexander of Macedonia) His ninth
attribute, Eternity, may be found—that is to say, the immediate knowledge of everything under the sun that will be,
that is, and that was. Tradition lists ninety-nine names of
God; Hebrew scholars explain that imperfect cipher by a
mystic fear of even numbers; the Hasidim argue that the
missing term stands for a hundredth name—the Absolute
Name.

It was out of this bookworming that Lönnrot was distracted a few days later by the appearance of the editor from
the Jüdische Zeitung, who wanted to speak about the murder. Lönnrot, however, chose to speak of the many names of
the Lord. The following day, in three columns, the journalist
stated that Chief Detective Erik Lönnrot had taken up the
study of the names of God in order to find out the name of
the murderer. Lönnrot, familiar with the simplifications of
journalism, was not surprised. It also seemed that one of
those tradesmen who have discovered that any man is willing
to buy any book was peddling a cheap edition of Yarmolinsky’s History of the Hasidic Sect.

The second murder took place on the night of January
third out in the most forsaken and empty of the city’s
western reaches. Along about daybreak, one of the police
who patrol this lonely area on horseback noticed on the
doorstep of a dilapidated paint and hardware store a man
in a poncho laid out flat. A deep knife wound had ripped
open his chest, and his hard features looked as though they
were masked in blood. On the wall, on the shop’s conventional red and yellow diamond shapes, were some words
scrawled in chalk. The policeman read them letter by
letter. That evening, Treviranus and Lönnrot made their way
across town to the remote scene of the crime. To the left
and right of their car the city fell away in shambles; the
sky grew wider and houses were of much less account than
brick kilns or an occasional poplar. They reached their
forlorn destination, an unpaved back alley with rose-colored
walls that in some way seemed to reflect the garish sunset.
The dead man had already been identified. He turned out
to be Daniel Simon Azevedo, a man with a fair reputation
in the old northern outskirts of town who had risen from
teamster to electioneering thug and later degenerated into a
thief and an informer. (The unusual manner of his death
seemed to them fitting, for Azevedo was the last example of
a generation of criminals who knew how to handle a knife
but not a revolver.) The words chalked up on the wall were
these:

The second letter of the Name has been uttered

The third murder took place on the night of February
third. A little before one o’clock, the telephone rang in the
office of Inspector Treviranus. With pointed secrecy, a man
speaking in a guttural voice said his name was Ginzberg (or
Ginsburg) and that he was ready—for a reasonable consideration—to shed light on the facts surrounding the double
sacrifice of Azevedo and Yarmolinsky. A racket of whistles
and tin horns drowned out the informer’s voice. Then the
line went dead. Without discounting the possibility of a
practical joke (they were, after all, at the height of Carnival), Treviranus checked and found that he had been
phoned from a sailors’ tavern called Liverpool House on the
Rue de Toulon—that arcaded waterfront street in which we
find side by side the wax museum and the dairy bar, the
brothel and the Bible seller. Treviranus called the owner
back. The man (Black Finnegan by name, a reformed Irish
criminal concerned about and almost weighed down by
respectability) told him that the last person to have used
the telephone was one of his roomers, a certain Gryphius,
who had only minutes before gone out with some friends.
At once Treviranus set out for Liverpool House. There the
owner told him the following story:

Eight days earlier, Gryphius had taken a small room
above the bar. He was a sharp-featured man with a misty
gray beard, shabbily dressed in black. Finnegan (who used
that room for a purpose Treviranus immediately guessed)
had asked the roomer for a rent that was obviously steep,
and
Gryphius
paid
the
stipulated
sum
on
the
spot.
Hardly
ever going out, he took lunch and supper in his room; in
fact, his face was hardly known in the bar. That night he
had come down to use the telephone in Finnegan’s office. A
coupé had drawn up outside. The coachman had stayed on
his seat; some customers recalled that he wore the mask of
a bear. Two harlequins got out of the carriage. They were
very short men and nobody could help noticing that they
were very drunk. Bleating their horns, they burst into
Finnegan’s office, throwing their arms around Gryphius, who
seemed to know them but who did not warm to their
company. The three exchanged a few words in Yiddish—he
in a low, guttural voice, they in a piping falsetto—and they
climbed the stairs up to his room. In a quarter of an hour
they came down again, very happy. Gryphius, staggering,
seemed as drunk as the others. He walked in the middle,
tall and dizzy, between the two masked harlequins. (One of
the women in the bar remembered their costumes of red,
green, and yellow lozenges.) Twice he stumbled; twice
the harlequins held him up. Then the trio climbed into the
coupé and, heading for the nearby docks (which enclosed a
string of rectangular bodies of water), were soon out of
sight. Out front, from the running board, the last harlequin
had scrawled an obscene drawing and certain words on one
of the market slates hung from a pillar of the arcade.

Treviranus stepped outside for a look. Almost predictably, the phrase read:

The last letter of the Name has been uttered

He next examined Gryphius-Ginzberg’s tiny room. On
the floor was a star-shaped spatter of blood; in the corners,
cigarette butts of a Hungarian brand; in the wardrobe, a
book in Latin—a 1739 edition of Leusden’s Philologus HebraeoGraecus—with a number of annotations written in by
hand. Treviranus gave it an indignant look and sent for
Lönnrot. While the Inspector questioned the contradictory
witnesses to the possible kidnapping, Lönnrot, not even bothering to take off his hat, began reading. At four o’clock they
left. In the twisted Rue de Toulon, as they were stepping
over last night’s tangle of streamers and confetti,” Treviranus remarked, “And if tonight’s events were a put-upjob?”

Erik Lönnrot smiled and read to him with perfect gravity
an underlined passage from the thirty-third chapter of the
Philologus: “ ‘Dies Judaeorum incipit a solis occasu usque
ad solis occasum diei sequentis.’ Meaning,” he added, “ ‘the
Jewish day begins at sundown and ends the following sundown.’ ”

The other man attempted a bit of irony. “Is that the
most valuable clue you’ve picked up tonight?” he said.
“No. Far more valuable is one of the words Ginzbergused to you on the phone.”

The evening papers made a great deal of these recurrent
disappearances. La Croix de l’Épée
contrasted the present
acts of violence with the admirable discipline and order
observed by the last Congress of Hermits. Ernst Palast, in
The Martyr, condemned “the unbearable pace of this unauthorized and stinting pogrom, which has required three
months for the liquidation of three Jews.” The Jüdische
Zeitung
rejected the ominous suggestion of an anti-Semitic
plot, “despite the fact that many penetrating minds admit
of no other solution to the threefold mystery.” The leading
gunman of the city’s Southside, Dandy Red Scharlach,
swore that in his part of town crimes of that sort would
never happen, and he accused Inspector Franz Treviranus
of criminal negligence.

On the night of March first, Inspector Treviranus received a great sealed envelope. Opening it, he found it
contained a letter signed by one “Baruch Spinoza” and,
evidently torn out of a Baedeker, a detailed plan of the
city. The letter predicted that on the third of March there
would not be a fourth crime because the paint and hardware store on the Westside, the Rue de Toulon tavern, and
the Hôtel du Nord formed “the perfect sides of an
equilateral and mystical triangle.” In red ink the map
demonstrated that the three sides of the figure were exactly
the same length. Treviranus read this Euclidean reasoning
with a certain weariness and sent the letter and map to
Erik Lönnrot—the man, beyond dispute, most deserving of
such cranky notions.

Lönnrot studied them. The three points were, in fact,
equidistant. There was symmetry in time (December third,
January third, February third); now there was symmetry
in space as well. All at once he felt he was on the verge of
solving the riddle. A pair of dividers and a compass completed his sudden intuition. He smiled, pronounced the
word Tetragrammaton (of recent acquisition) and called
the Inspector on the phone.

“Thanks for the equilateral triangle you sent me last
night,” he told him. “It has helped me unravel our mystery. Tomorrow, Friday, the murderers will be safely behind
bars; we can rest quite easy.”

“Then they aren’t planning a fourth crime?”
“Precisely because they are
planning a fourth crime we
can rest quite easy.”

Lönnrot hung up the receiver. An hour later, he was
traveling on a car of the Southern Railways on his way to
the deserted villa Triste-le-Roy. To the south of the city of
my story flows a dark muddy river, polluted by the waste
of tanneries and sewers. On the opposite bank is a factory
suburb where, under the patronage of a notorious political
boss, many gunmen thrive. Lönnrot smiled to himself, thinking that the best-known of them—Red Scharlach—would
have given anything to know about this sudden excursion of
his. Azevedo had been a henchman of Scharlach’s. Lönnrot
considered the remote possibility that the fourth victim
might be Scharlach himself. Then he dismissed it. He had
practically solved the puzzle; the mere circumstances—
reality (names, arrests, faces, legal and criminal proceedings)—barely held his interest now. He wanted to get away,
to relax after three months of desk work and of snail-pace
investigation. He reflected that the solution of the killings
lay in an anonymously sent triangle and in a dusty Greek
word. The mystery seemed almost crystal clear. He felt
ashamed for having spent close to a hundred days on it.
The train came to a stop at a deserted loading platform.
Lönnrot got off. It was one of those forlorn evenings that
seem as empty as dawn. The air off the darkening prairies
was damp and cold. Lönnrot struck out across the fields. He
saw dogs, he saw a flatcar on a siding, he saw the line of the
horizon, he saw a pale horse drinking stagnant water out of
a ditch. Night was falling when he saw the rectangular
mirador of the villa Triste-le-Roy, almost as tall as the
surrounding black eucalyptus trees. He thought that only
one more dawn and one more dusk (an ancient light in the
east and another in the west) were all that separated him
from the hour appointed by the seekers of the Name.

A rusted iron fence bounded the villa’s irregular perimeter. The main gate was shut. Lönnrot, without much hope of
getting in, walked completely around the place. Before the
barred gate once again, he stuck a hand through the palings—almost mechanically—and found the bolt. The squeal
of rusted iron surprised him. With clumsy obedience, the
whole gate swung open.

Lönnrot moved forward among the eucalyptus trees, stepping on the layered generations of fallen leaves. Seen from
up close, the house was a clutter of meaningless symmetries
and almost insane repetitions: one icy Diana in a gloomy
niche matched another Diana in a second niche; one balcony appeared to reflect another; double outer staircases
crossed at each landing. A two-faced Hermes cast a monstrous shadow. Lönnrot made his way around the house as he
had made his way around the grounds. He went over every
detail; below the level of the terrace he noticed a narrow
shutter.

He pushed it open. A few marble steps went down into a
cellar. Lönnrot, who by now anticipated the architect’s
whims, guessed that in the opposite wall he would find a
similar sets of steps. He did. Climbing them, he lifted his
hands and raised a trapdoor.

A stain of light led him to a window. He opened it. A
round yellow moon outlined two clogged fountains in the
unkempt
garden.
Lönnrot
explored
the
house.
Through
serv
ing pantries and along corridors he came to identical courtyards and several times to the same courtyard. He climbed
dusty stairways to circular anterooms, where he was multiplied to infinity in facing mirrors. He grew weary of
opening or of peeping through windows that revealed, outside, the same desolate garden seen from various heights
and various angles; and indoors he grew weary of the rooms
of furniture, each draped in yellowing slipcovers, and the
crystal chandeliers wrapped in tarlatan. A bedroom caught
his attention—in it, a single flower in a porcelain vase. At a
touch, the ancient petals crumbled to dust. On the third
floor, the last floor, the house seemed endless and growing.
The house is not so large, he thought. This dim light, the
sameness, the mirrors, the many years, my unfamiliarity,
the loneliness are what make it large.

By a winding staircase he reached the mirador. That evening’s moon streamed in through the diamond-shaped panes;
they were red, green, and yellow. He was stopped by an
awesome, dizzying recollection.

Two short men, brutal and stocky, threw themselves on
him and disarmed him: another, very tall, greeted him
solemnly and told him, “You are very kind. You’ve saved
us a night and a day.”

It was Red Scharlach. The men bound Lönnrot’s wrists.
After some seconds, Lönnrot at last heard himself saying,
“Scharlach, are you after the Secret Name?”

Scharlach remained standing, aloof. He had taken no
part in the brief struggle and had barely held out his hand
for Lönnrot’s revolver. He spoke. Lönnrot heard in his voice
the weariness of final triumph, a hatred the size of the
universe, a sadness as great as that hatred.

“No,” said Scharlach. “I’m after something more ephemeral, more frail. I’m after Erik Lönnrot. Three years ago,
in a gambling dive on the Rue de Toulon, you yourself
arrested my brother and got him put away. My men managed to get me into a coupé before the shooting was over,
but I had a cop’s bullet in my guts. Nine days and nine
nights I went through hell, here in this deserted villa,
racked with fever. The hateful two-faced Janus that looks
on the sunsets and the dawns filled both my sleep and my
wakefulness with its horror. I came to loathe my body, I
came to feel that two eyes, two hands, two lungs, are as
monstrous as two faces. An Irishman, trying to convert me
to the faith of Jesus, kept repeating to me the saying of the
goyim—All roads lead to Rome. At night, my fever fed on
that metaphor. I felt the world was a maze from which
escape was impossible since all roads, though they seemed
to be leading north or south, were really leading to Rome,
which at the same time was the square cell where my
brother lay dying and also this villa, Triste-le-Roy. During
those nights, I swore by the god who looks with two faces
and by all the gods of fever and of mirrors that I would
weave a maze around the man who sent my brother to
prison. Well, I have woven it and it’s tight. Its materials
are a dead rabbi, a compass, an eighteenth-century sect, a
Greek word, a dagger, and the diamond-shaped patterns on
a paint-store wall.”

Lönnrot was in a chair now, with the two short men at his
side.

“The first term of the series came to me by pure
chance,” Scharlach went on. “With some associates of
mine—among them Daniel Azevedo—I’d planned the theft
of the Tetrarch’s sapphires. Azevedo betrayed us. He got
drunk on the money we advanced him and tried to pull the
job a day earlier. But there in the hotel he got mixed up
and around two in the morning blundered into Yarmolinsky’s room. The rabbi, unable to sleep, had decided to do
some writing. In all likelihood, he was preparing notes or a
paper on the Name of God and had already typed out the
words ‘The first letter of the Name has been uttered.’
Azevedo warned him not to move. Yarmolinsky reached his
hand toward the buzzer that would have wakened all the
hotel staff; Azevedo struck him a single blow with his
knife. It was probably a reflex action. Fifty years of violence had taught him that the easiest and surest way is to
kill.
Ten
days
later,
I
found
out
through
the
Jüdische
Zeitung
that you were looking for the key to Yarmolinsky’s
death in his writings. I read his History of the Hasidic
Sect. I learned that the holy fear of uttering God’s Name
had given rise to the idea that that Name is secret and
all-powerful. I learned that some of the Hasidim, in search
of that secret Name, had gone as far as to commit human
sacrifices. The minute I realized you were guessing that the
Hasidim had sacrificed the rabbi, I did my best to justify
that guess. Yarmolinsky died the night of December third.
For the second Sacrifice’ I chose the night of January
third. The rabbi had died on the Northside; for the second
‘sacrifice’ we wanted a spot on the Westside. Daniel
Azevedo was the victim we needed. He deserved death—he
was impulsive, a traitor. If he’d been picked up, it would
have wiped out our whole plan. One of my men stabbed
him; in order to link his corpse with the previous one, I
scrawled on the diamonds of the paint-store wall ‘The
second letter of the Name has been uttered.’ ”

Scharlach looked his victim straight in the face, then
continued. “The third ‘crime’ was staged on the third of
February. It was, as Treviranus guessed, only a plant.
Gryphius-Ginzberg-Ginsburg was me. I spent an interminable week (rigged up in a false beard) in that flea-ridden
cubicle on the Rue de Toulon until my friends came to
kidnap me. From the running board of the carriage, one of
them wrote on the pillar, ‘The last letter of the Name has
been uttered.’ That message suggested that the series of
crimes was threefold. That was how the public understood
it. I, however, threw in repeated clues so that you, Erik
Lönnrot the reasoner, might puzzle out that the crime was
fourfold. A murder in the north, others in the east and
west, demanded a fourth murder in the south. The Tetragrammaton—the Name of God, JHVH—is made up of
four
letters; the harlequins and the symbol on the paint store
also suggest four
terms. I underlined a certain passage in
Leusden’s handbook. That passage makes it clear that the
Jews reckoned the day from sunset to sunset; that passage
makes it understood that the deaths occurred on the fourth
of each month. I was the one who sent the triangle to
Treviranus, knowing in advance that you would supply the
missing point—the point that determines the perfect rhombus, the point that fixes the spot where death is expecting
you. I planned the whole thing, Erik Lönnrot, so as to lure
you to the loneliness of Triste-le-Roy.”

Lönnrot avoided Scharlach’s eyes. He looked off at the
trees and the sky broken into dark diamonds of red, green,
and yellow. He felt a chill and an impersonal, almost
anonymous sadness. It was night now; from down in the
abandoned garden came the unavailing cry of a bird.
Lönnrot, for one last time, reflected on the problem of the
patterned, intermittent deaths.

“In your maze there are three lines too many,” he said at
last. “I know of a Greek maze that is a single straight line.
Along this line so many thinkers have lost their way that a
mere detective may very well lose his way. Scharlach, when
in another incarnation you hunt me down, stage (or commit) a murder at A, then a second murder at B, eight miles
from A, then a third murder at C, four miles from A and B,
halfway between the two. Lay in wait for me then at D, two
miles from A and C, again halfway between them. Kill me
at D, the way you are going to kill me here at Triste-leRoy.”

“The next time I kill you,” said Scharlach, “I promise you
such a maze, which is made up of a single straight line and
which is invisible and unending.”

He moved back a few steps. Then, taking careful aim,
he fired.
The Life of
Tadeo Isidoro Cruz
(1829-1874)

(1944)

I’m looking for the face I had
Before the world was made.

Yeats, A Woman Young and Old

On the sixth of February, 1829, a troop of gaucho militia, harried all day by Lavalle on their march north to join
the army under the command of López, made a halt some
nine or ten miles from Pergamino at a ranch whose name
they did not know. Along about dawn, one of the men had
a haunting nightmare and, in the dim shadows of a shed
where he lay sleeping, his confused outcry woke the woman
who shared his bed. Nobody ever knew what he dreamed,
for around four o’clock that afternoon the gauchos were
routed by a detachment of Suárez’ cavalry in a chase that
went on for over twenty miles and ended, in thickening
twilight, in tall swamp grasses, where the man died in a
ditch, his skull split by a saber that had seen service in the
Peruvian and Brazilian wars. The woman’s name was
Isidora Cruz. The son born to her was given the name
Tadeo Isidoro.

My aim here is not to recount his whole personal history.
Of the many days and nights that make up his life, only a
single night concerns me; as to the rest, I shall tell only
what is necessary to that night’s full understanding. The
episode belongs to a famous poem—that is to say, to a poem
which has come to mean “all things to all men” (I
Corinthians 9:22), since almost endless variations, versions, and perversions have been read into its pages. Those
who have theorized about Tadeo Isidoro’s story—and they
are many—lay stress upon the influence of the wide-open
plains on his character, but gauchos exactly like him were
born and died along the wooded banks of the Paraná and in
the hilly back country of Uruguay. He lived, it must be
admitted, in a world of unrelieved barbarism. When he
died, in 1874, in an outbreak of smallpox, he had never
laid eyes on a mountain or a gas jet or a windmill pump.
Nor on a city. In 1849, he went to Buenos Aires on a
cattle drive from the ranch of Francisco Xavier Acevedo.
The other drovers went into town on a spending spree;
Cruz, somewhat wary, did not stray far from a shabby inn
in the neighborhood of the stockyards. There he spent
several days, by himself, sleeping on the ground, brewing his
maté, getting up at daybreak, and going to bed at dusk. He
realized (beyond words and even beyond understanding)
that he could not cope with the city. One of the drovers,
having drunk too much, began poking fun at him. Cruz
ignored him, but several times on the way home, at night
around the campfire, the other man kept on with his gibes,
and Cruz (who up till then had shown neither anger nor
annoyance) laid him out with his knife.

On the run, Cruz was forced to hide out in a marshy
thicket. A few nights later, the cries of a startled plover
warned him he had been ringed in by the police. He tested
his knife in a thick clump of grass and, to keep from
entangling his feet, took off his spurs. Choosing to fight it
out rather than be taken, he got himself wounded in the
forearm, in the shoulder, and in the left hand. When he felt
the blood dripping between his fingers; he fought harder
than ever, badly wounding the toughest members of the
search
party.
Toward
daybreak,
weak
with
loss
of
blood,
he
was disarmed. The army in those days acted as a kind of
penal institution; Cruz was sent off to serve in an outpost
on the northern frontier. As a common soldier, he took part
in the civil wars, sometimes fighting for the province of his
birth, sometimes against. On the twenty-third of January,
1856, in the Cardoso marshes, he was one of thirty white
men who, led by Sergeant Major Eusebio Laprida, fought
against two hundred Indians. In this action he was wounded by a spear.

The dim and hardy story of his life is full of gaps.
Around 1868, we hear of him once more in Pergamino,
married or living with a woman, father of a son, and owner
of a small holding of land. In 1869, he was appointed
sergeant of the local police. He had made up for his past
and, in those days, may have thought of himself as a happy
man, though deep down he wasn’t. (What lay in wait for
him, hidden in the future, was a night of stark illumination—
the night in which at last he glimpsed his own face, the
night in which at last he heard his name. Fully understood,
that night exhausts his story; or rather, one moment in that
night, one deed, since deeds are our symbols.) Any life, no
matter how long or complex it may be, is made up essentially of a single moment—the moment in which a man finds
out, once and for all, who he is. It has been said that
Alexander the Great saw his iron future in the fabled story
of Achilles, and Charles XII of Sweden, his in the story of
Alexander. To Tadeo Isidoro Cruz, who did not know how
to read, this revelation was not given by a book; it was in a
manhunt and in the man he was hunting that he learned
who he was. The thing happened in this way:

During the last days of the month of June, 1870, he
received orders to capture an outlaw who had killed two
men. The man was a deserter from the forces of Colonel
Benito Machado on the southern frontier; he had killed a
Negro in a drunken brawl in a whorehouse and, in another
brawl, a man from the district of Rojas. The report added
that he had last been seen near the Laguna Colorada. This
was the same place where the troop of gaucho militia had
gathered, some forty years earlier, before starting out on
the misadventure that gave their flesh to the vultures and
dogs. Out of this spot had come Manuel Mesa, who was
later made to stand before a firing squad in the central
square of Buenos Aires while the drums rolled in order to
drown out his last words; out of this spot had come the
unknown man who fathered Cruz and died in a ditch, his
skull split by a saber that had seen action on the battlefields of Peru and Brazil. Cruz had forgotten the name of
the place. Now, after a vague and puzzling uneasiness, it
came to him.

Pursued by the soldiers and shuttling back and forth on
horseback, the hunted man had woven a long maze, but
nonetheless, on the night of July twelfth, the troops tracked
him down. He had taken shelter in a growth of tall reeds.
The darkness was nearly impenetrable; Cruz and his men,
stealthily and on foot, advanced toward the clumps in
whose swaying center the hidden man lay in wait or asleep.
A startled plover let out a cry. Tadeo Isidoro Cruz had the
feeling of having lived this moment before. The hunted
man came out of his hiding place to fight them in the open.
Cruz made out the hideous figure—his overgrown hair and
gray beard seemed to eat away his face. An obvious reason
keeps me from describing the fight that followed. Let me
simply point out that the deserter badly wounded or killed
several of Cruz’s men. Cruz, while he fought in the dark
(while his body fought in the dark), began to understand.
He understood that one destiny is no better than another,
but that every man must obey what is within him. He
understood that his shoulder braid and his uniform were
now in his way. He understood that his real destiny was as
a lone wolf, not a gregarious dog. He understood that the
other man was himself. Day dawned over the boundless
plain. Cruz threw down his kepi, called out that he would
not be party to the crime of killing a brave man, and began
fighting against his own soldiers, shoulder to shoulder with
Martín Fierro, the deserter.
The Two Kings and
Their Two Labyrinths

(1946)

[This is the story the Reverend Allaby tells from the pulpitin
“Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, Dead in His Labyrinth.”
See page 77]

Chroniclers worthy of trust have recorded (but only Allah
is All-Knowing) that in former times there was a king of
the isles of Babylon who called together his architects and
his wizards and set them to build him a labyrinth so
intricate that no wise man would dare enter inside, and so
subtle that those who did would lose their way. This undertaking was a blasphemy, for confusion and marvels belong
to God alone and not to man. With the passage of time
there came to his court a king of the Arabs, and the king of
Babylon (wishing to mock his guest’s simplicity) allowed
him to set foot in his labyrinth, where he wandered in
humiliation and bewilderment until the coming of night. It
was then that the second king implored the help of God
and soon after came upon the door. He suffered his lips to
utter no complaint, but he told the king of Babylon that
he, too, had a labyrinth in his land and that, God willing,
he would one day take pleasure in showing it to his host.
Then he returned to Arabia, gathered his captains and his
armies, and overran the realms of Babylon with so fair a
fortune that he ravaged its castles, broke its peoples, and
took captive the king himself. He bound him onto a swift
camel and brought him into the desert. Three days they
rode, and then the captor said, “O king of time and crown
of the century! In Babylon you lured me into a labyrinth
of brass cluttered with many stairways, doors, and walls;
now the Almighty has brought it to pass that I show you
mine, which has no stairways to climb, nor doors to force,
nor unending galleries to wear one down, nor walls to block
one’s way.”

He then loosened the bonds of the first king and left him
in the heart of the desert to die of thirst and hunger. Glory
be to the Living, who dieth not.
The Dead Man

(1946)

That a man from the outlying slums of a city like Buenos
Aires, that a sorry hoodlum with little else to his credit
than a passion for recklessness, should find his way into
that wild stretch of horse country between Brazil and
Uruguay and become the leader of a band of smugglers,
seems on the face of it unbelievable. To those who think so,
I’d like to give an account of what happened to Benjamín
Otálora, of whom perhaps not a single memory lingers in
the neighborhood where he grew up, and who died a fitting
death, struck down by a bullet, somewhere on the border of
Rio Grande do Sul. Of the details of his adventures I know
little; should I ever be given the facts, I shall correct and
expand these pages. For the time being, this outline may
prove of some use.

Benjamín Otálora, along about 1891, is a strapping
young man of nineteen. He has a low forehead, candid blue
eyes, and that country-boy appearance that goes with
Basque ancestry. A lucky blow with a knife has made clear
to him that he is also brave; his opponent’s death causes
him no concern, nor does his need to flee the country. The
political boss of the district gives him a letter of introduction to a certain Azevedo Bandeira, in Uruguay. Otálora
books passage; the crossing is stormy and the ship pitches
and creaks. The next day, he wanders the length and
breadth of Montevideo, with unacknowledged or perhaps
unsuspected homesickness. He does not find Azevedo Bandeira. Getting on toward midnight, in a small saloon out on
the northern edge of town, he witnesses a brawl between
some cattle drovers. A knife flashes. Otálora has no idea
who is in the right or wrong, but the sheer taste of danger
lures him, just as cards or music lure other men. In the
confusion, he blocks a lunging knife thrust that one off the
gauchos aims at a man wearing a rough countryman’s
poncho and, oddly, the dark derby of a townsman. The
man turns out to be Azevedo Bandeira. (As soon as he finds
this out, Otálora destroys the letter, preferring to be under
no one’s obligation.) Azevedo Bandeira, though of stocky
build, gives the unaccountable impression of being somehow
misshapen. In his large face, which seems always to be too
close, are the Jew, the Negro, and the Indian; in his
bearing, the tiger and the ape. The scar that cuts across his
cheek is one ornament more, like his bristling black
moustache.

A fantasy or a mistake born of drunkenness, the fight
ends as quickly as it broke out. Otálora takes a drink with
the drovers and then goes along with them to an all-night
party and after that—the sun high in the sky by now—to a
rambling house in the Old Town. Inside, on the bare
ground of the last patio, the men lay out their sheepskin
saddle blankets to sleep. Dimly, Otálora compares this past
night with the night before; here he is, on solid ground
now, among friends. A pang of remorse for not missing his
Buenos Aires nags at him, however. He sleeps until nightfall, when he is wakened by the same gaucho who, blind
drunk, had tried to knife Bandeira. (Otálora recalls that
the man has shared the high-spirited night with the rest of
them, and that Bandeira had seated him at his right hand
and forced him to go on drinking.) The man says the boss
has sent for him. In a kind of office opening into the
entrance passage (Otálora has never before seen an entrance with doors opening into it from the sides), Azevedo
Bandeira, in the company of an aloof and showy red-haired
woman, is waiting for him. Bandeira praises him up and
down, offers him a shot of rum, tells him he has the
makings of a man of guts, suggests that he go up north with
the others to bring back a large cattle herd. Otálora agrees;
toward dawn they are on the road, heading for Tacuarembó.

For Otálora a new kind of life opens up, a life of
far-flung sunrises and long days in the saddle, reeking of
horses. It is an untried and at times unbearable life, but it’s
already in his blood, for just as the men of certain countries
worship and feel the call of the sea, we Argentines in turn
(including the man who weaves these symbols) yearn for
the boundless plains that ring under a horse’s hooves. Otálora has grown up in a neighborhood of teamsters and
liverymen. In under a year, he makes himself into a
gaucho. He learns to handle a horse, to round up and
slaughter cattle, to throw a rope for holding an animal fast
or bolas for bringing it down, to fight off sleep, to weather
storms and frosts and sun, to drive a herd with whistles and
hoots. Only once during this whole apprenticeship does he
set eyes on Azevedo Bandeira, but he has him always in
mind because to be one of Bandeira’s men is to be looked up
to and feared, and because after any feat or hard job the
gauchos always say Bandeira does it better. Somebody has
it that Bandeira was born on the Brazilian side of the
Cuareim, in Rio Grande do Sul; this, which should lower
him in Otálora’s eyes, somehow—with its suggestion of dense
forests and of marshes and of inextricable and almost endless distances—only adds to him. Little by little, Otálora
comes to realize that Bandeira’s interests are many and
that chief among them is smuggling. To be a cattle drover
is to be a servant; Otálora decides to work himself up to the
level of smuggler. One night, as two of his companions are
about to go over the border to bring back a consignment of
rum, Otálora picks a fight with one of them, wounds him,
and takes his place. He is driven by ambition and also by a
dim sense of loyalty. The man (he thinks) will come to find
out that I’m worth more than all his Uruguayans puttogether.

Another year goes by before Otálora sees Montevideo
again. They come riding through the outskirts and into the
city (which to Otálora now seems enormous); reaching the
boss’s house, the men prepare to bed down in the last patio.
The days pass, and Otálora still has not laid eyes on
Bandeira. It is said, in fear, that he is ailing; every afternoon a Negro goes up to Bandeira’s room with a kettle and
maté. One evening, the job is assigned to Otálora. He feels
vaguely humiliated, but at the same time gratified.

The bedroom is bare and dark. There’s a balcony that
faces the sunset, there’s a long table with a shining disarray
of riding crops, bullwhips, cartridge belts, firearms, and
knives. On the far wall there’s a mirror and the glass is
faded. Bandeira lies face up, dreaming and muttering in his
sleep; the sun’s last rays outline his features. The big white
bed seems to make him smaller, darker. Otálora notes his
graying hair, his exhaustion, his weakness, the deep wrinkles of his years. It angers him being mastered by this old
man. He thinks that a single blow would be enough to
finish him. At this moment, he glimpses in the mirror that
someone has come in. It’s the woman with the red hair; she
is barefoot and only half-dressed, and looks at him with
cold curiosity. Bandeira sits up in bed; while he speaks of
business affairs of the past two years and drinks maté after
maté, his fingers toy with the woman’s braided hair. In the
end, he gives Otálora permission to leave.

A few days later, they get orders to head north again.
There, in a place that might be anywhere on the face of the
endless plains, they come to a forlorn ranch. Not a single
tree
or
a
brook.
The
sun’s
first
and
last
rays
beat
down
on
it. There are stone fences for the lean longhorn cattle. This
rundown set of buildings is called “The Last Sigh.”

Sitting around the fire with the ranch hands, Otálora
hears that Bandeira will soon be on his way from Montevideo. He asks what for, and someone explains that there’s an
outsider turned gaucho among them who’s giving too many
orders. Otálora takes this as a friendly joke and is flattered
that the joke can be made. Later on, he finds out that
Bandeira has had a falling out with one of the political
bosses, who has withdrawn his support. Otálora likes this
bit of news.

Crates of rifles arrive; a pitcher and washbasin, both of
silver, arrive for the woman’s bedroom; intricately figured
damask draperies arrive; one morning, from out of the
hills, a horseman arrives—a sullen man with a full beard and
a poncho. His name is Ulpiano Suárez and he is Azevedo
Bandeira’s strong-arm man, or bodyguard. He speaks very
little and with a thick Brazilian accent. Otálora does not
know whether to put down his reserve to unfriendliness, or
to contempt, or to mere backwoods manners. He realizes,
however, that to carry out the scheme he is hatching he
must win the other man’s friendship.

Next into Benjamín Otálora’s story comes a black-legged
bay horse that Azevedo Bandeira brings from the south,
and that carries a fine saddle worked with silver and a
saddle blanket trimmed with a jaguar skin. This spirited
horse is a token of Bandeira’s authority and for this reason
is coveted by the young man, who comes also—with a
desire bordering on spite—to hunger for the woman with the
shining hair. The woman, the saddle, and the big bay are
attributes or trappings of a man he aspires to bring down.

At this point the story takes another turn. Azevedo Bandeira is skilled in the art of slow intimidation, in the
diabolical trickery of leading a man on, step by step,
shifting from sincerity to mockery. Otálora decides to apply
this ambiguous method to the hard task before him. He
decides to replace Azevedo Bandeira, but to take his time
over it. During days of shared danger, he gains Suárez’
friendship. He confides his plan to him; Suárez pledges to
help. Then a number of things begin happening of which I
know only a few. Otálora disobeys Bandeira’s orders; he
takes to overlooking them, changing them, defying them.
The whole world seems to conspire with him, hastening
events. One noontime, somewhere around Tacuarembó,
there is an exchange of gunfire with a gang from Brazil;
Otálora takes Bandeira’s place and shouts out orders to the
Uruguayans. A bullet hits him in the shoulder, but that
afternoon Otálora rides back to “The Last Sigh” on the
boss’s horse, and that evening some drops of his blood stain
the jaguar skin, and that night he sleeps with the woman
with the shining hair. Other accounts change the order of
these events, denying they happened all in the same day.

Bandeira, nevertheless, remains nominally the boss. He
goes on giving orders which are not carried out. Benjamín
Otálora leaves him alone, out of mixed reasons of habit and
pity.
The closing scene of the story coincides with the commotion of the closing night of the year 1894. On this night,
the men of “The Last Sigh” eat freshly slaughtered meat and
fall into quarreling over their liquor; someone picks out on
the guitar, over and over again, a milonga
that gives him a
lot of trouble. At the head of the table, Otálora, feeling his
drink, piles exultation upon exultation, boast upon boast;
this dizzying tower is a symbol of his irresistible destiny.
Bandeira, silent amid the shouting, lets the night flow
noisily on. When the clock strikes twelve, he gets up like a
man just remembering he has something to do. He gets up
and softly knacks at the woman’s door. She opens at once,
as though waiting to be called. She steps out barefoot and
half-dressed. In an almost feminine, soft-spoken drawl,
Bandeira gives her an order.

“Since you and the Argentine care so much for each
other,” he says, “you’re going to kiss him right now in front
of everyone.”

He adds an obscene detail. The woman tries to resist, but
two
men
have
taken
her
by
the
arms
and
fling
her
upon
Otálora. Brought to tears, she kisses his face and chest,
Ulpiano Suárez has his revolver out. Otálora realizes, before dying, that he has been betrayed from the start, that he
has been sentenced to death—that love and command and
triumph have been accorded him because his companions
already thought of him as a dead man, because to Bandeira he already was a dead man.

Suárez, almost in contempt, fires the shot.
The Other Death

(1948)

I have mislaid the letter, but a couple of years or so agoGannon wrote me from his ranch up in Gualeguaychú
saying he would send me a translation, perhaps the very
first into Spanish, of Ralph Waldo Emerson’s poem “The
Past,” and adding in a P.S. that don Pedro Damián, whom
I might recall, had died of a lung ailment a few nights
earlier. The man (Gannon went on), wasted by fever, had
in his delirium relived the long ordeal of the battle of
Masoller. It seemed to me there was nothing unreasonable
or out of the ordinary about this news since don Pedro,
when he was nineteen or twenty, had been a follower of the
banners of Aparicio Saravia. Pedro Damián had been working as a hand up north on a ranch in Río Negro or
Paysandú when the 1904 revolution broke out. Although
he was from Gualeguaychú, in the province of Entre Ríos,
he went along with his friends and, being as cocky and
ignorant as they were, joined the rebel army. He fought in
one
or
two
skirmishes
and
in
the
final
battle.
Returned
home in 1905, Damián, with a kind of humble stubbornness, once more took up his work as a cowhand. For all I
know, he never left his native province again. He spent his
last thirty years living in a small lonely cabin eight or ten
miles from Ñancay. It was in that out-of-the-way place that
I spoke with him one evening (that Í tried to speak with
him one evening) back around 1942; he was a man of few
words, and not very bright. Masoller, it turned out, was the
whole of his personal history. And so I was not surprised to
find out that he had lived the sound and fury of that battle
over again at the hour of his death. When I knew I would
never see Damián another time, I wanted to remember
him, but so poor is my memory for faces that all I could
recall was the snapshot Gannon had taken of him. There is
nothing unusual in this fact, considering that I saw the man
only once at the beginning of 1942, but had looked at his
picture many times. Gannon sent me the photograph and
it, too, has been misplaced. I think now that if I were to
come across it, I would feel afraid.

The second episode took place in Montevideo, months
later. Don Pedro’s fever and his agony gave me the idea for
a tale of fantasy based on the defeat at Masoller; Emir
Rodríguez Monegal, to whom I had told the plot, wrote me
an introduction to Colonel Dionisio Tabares, who had
fought in that campaign. The Colonel received me one
evening after dinner. From a rocking chair out in the side
yard, he recalled the old days with great feeling but at the
same time with a faulty sense of chronology. He spoke of
ammunition that never reached him and of reserves of
horses that arrived worn out, of sleepy dust-covered men
weaving labyrinths of marches, of Saravia, who might have
ridden into Montevideo but who passed it by “because the
gaucho has a fear of towns,” of throats hacked from ear to
ear, of a civil war that seemed to me less a military
operation than the dream of a cattle thief or an outlaw.
Names of battles kept coming up: Illescas, Tupambaé,
Masoller. The Colonel’s pauses were so effective and his
manner so vivid that I realized he had told and retold these
same things many times before, and I feared that behind
his words almost no true memories remained. When he
stopped for a breath, I managed to get in Damián’s name.

“Damián? Pedro Damián?” said the Colonel. “He served
with me. A little half-breed. I remember the boys used
to call him Daymán—after the river.” The Colonel let
out a burst of loud laughter, then cut it off all at once. I
could not tell whether his discomfort was real or put on.

In another voice, he stated that war, like women, served as
a test of men, and that nobody knew who he really was
until he had been under fire. A man might think himself a
coward and actually be brave. And the other way around,
too, as had happened to that poor Damián, who bragged his
way in and out of saloons with his white ribbon marking
him as a Blanco, and later on lost his nerve at Masoller. In
one exchange of gunfire with the regulars, he handled himself like a man, but then it was something else again when
the two armies met face to face and the artillery began
pounding away and every man felt as though there were five
thousand other men out there grouping to kill him. That
poor kid. He’d spent his life on a farm dipping sheep, and
then all of a sudden he gets himself dragged along and
mixed up in the grim reality of war. . . .

For some absurd reason Tabares’ version of the story
made me uncomfortable. I would have preferred things to
have happened differently. Without being aware of it, I had
made a kind of idol out of old Damián—a man I had seen
only once on a single evening many years earlier. Tabares’
story destroyed everything. Suddenly the reasons for Damián’s aloofness and his stubborn insistence on keeping to
himself were clear to me. They had not sprung from modesty but from shame. In vain, I told myself that a man
pursued by an act of cowardice is more complex and more
interesting than one who is merely courageous. The gaucho
Martín Fierro, I thought, is less memorable than Lord Jim or
Razumov. Yes, but Damián, as a gaucho, should have been
Martín Fierro—especially in the presence of Uruguayan
gauchos.
In
what
Tabares
left
unsaid,
I
felt
his
assumption
(perhaps undeniable) that Uruguay is more primitive than
Argentina and therefore physically braver. I remember we
said goodbye to each other that night with a cordiality that
was a bit marked.

During the winter, the need of one or two details for my
story (which somehow was slow in taking shape) sent me
back to Colonel Tabares again. I found him with another
man of his own age, a Dr. Juan Francisco Amaro from
Paysandú, who had also fought in Saravia’s revolution.
They spoke, naturally, of Masoller.

Amaro told a few anecdotes, then slowly added, in the
manner of someone who is thinking aloud, “We camped for
the night at Santa Irene, I recall, and some of the men
from around there joined us. Among them a French veterinarian, who died the night before the battle, and a boy, a
sheepshearer from Entre Ríos. Pedro Damián was his
name.”

I cut him off sharply. “Yes, I know,” I said. “The Argentine who couldn’t face the bullets.”

I stopped. The two of them were looking at me, puzzled.

“You are mistaken, sir,” Amaro said after a while.
“Pedro Damián died as any man might wish to die. It was
about four o’clock in the afternoon. The regular troops had
dug themselves in on the top of a hill and our men charged
them with lances. Damián rode at the head, shouting, and a
bullet struck him square in the chest. He stood up in his
stirrups, finished his shout, and then rolled to the ground,
where he lay under the horses’ hooves. He was dead, and
the whole last charge of Masoller trampled over him. So
fearless, and barely twenty.”

He was speaking, doubtless, of another Damián, but
something made me ask what it was the boy had shouted.
“Filth,” said the Colonel. “That’s what men shout in
action.”
“Maybe,” said Amaro, “but he also cried out, ‘Long live
Urquiza!’ ”
We were silent. Finally the Colonel murmured, “Not as
if we were fighting at Masoller, but at Cagancha or India
Muerta a hundred years ago.” He added, genuinely bewildered, “I commanded those troops, and I could swear it’s
the first time I’ve ever heard of this Damián.”

We had no luck in getting the Colonel to remember him.

Back in Buenos Aires, the amazement that his forgetfulness produced in me repeated itself. Browsing through the
eleven pleasurable volumes of Emerson’s works in the basement of Mitchell’s, the English bookstore, I met Patricio
Gannon one afternoon. I asked him for his translation of
“The Past.” He told me that he had no translation of it in
mind, and that, besides, Spanish literature was so boring it
made Emerson quite superfluous. I reminded him that he
had promised me the translation in the same letter in which
he wrote me of Damián’s death. He asked me who was
Damián. I told him in vain. With rising terror, I noticed
that he was listening to me very strangely, and I took
refuge in a literary discussion on the detractors of Emerson, a poet far more complex, far more skilled, and truly
more extraordinary than the unfortunate Poe.

I must put down some additional facts. In April, I had a
letter from Colonel Dionisio Tabares; his mind was no
longer vague and now he remembered quite well the boy
from Entre Ríos who spearheaded the charge at Masoller
and whom his men buried that night in a grave at the foot
of the hill. In July, I passed through Gualeguaychú; I did
not come across Damián’s cabin, and nobody there seemed
to remember him now. I wanted to question the foreman
Diego Abaroa, who saw Damián die, but Abaroa had passed
away himself at the beginning of the winter. I tried to call
to mind Damián’s features; months later, leafing through
some old albums, I found that the dark face I had attempted to evoke really belonged to the famous tenor Tamberlik, playing the role of Othello.

Now I move on to conjectures. The easiest, but at the
same time the least satisfactory, assumes two Damiáns: the
coward who died in Entre Ríos around 1946, and the man
of courage who died at Masoller in 1904. But this falls
apart
in
its
inability
to
explain
what
are
really
the
puzzles:
the strange fluctuations of Colonel Tabares’ memory, for
one, and the general forgetfulness, which in so short a time
could blot out the image and even the name of the man
who came back. (I cannot accept, I do not want to accept,
a simpler possibility—that of my having dreamed the first
man.) Stranger still is the supernatural conjecture thought
up by Ulrike von Kühlmann. Pedro Damián, said Ulrike,
was killed in the battle and at the hour of his death asked
God to carry him back to Entre Ríos. God hesitated a
moment before granting the request, but by then the man
was already dead and had been seen by others to have
fallen. God, who cannot unmake the past but can affect its
images, altered the image of Damián’s violent death into
one of falling into a faint. And so it was the boy’s ghost
that came back to his native province. Came back, but we
must not forget that it did so as a ghost. It lived in
isolation without a woman and without friends; it loved
and possessed everything, but from a distance, as from the
other side of a mirror; ultimately it “died” and its frail
image just disappeared, like water in water. This conjecture
is faulty, but it may have been responsible for pointing out
to me the true one (the one I now believe to be true),
which is at the same time simpler and more unprecedented.
In a mysterious way I discovered it in the treatise De
Omnipotentia
by Pier Damiani, after having been referred
to him by two lines in Canto XXI of the Paradiso, in which
the problem of Damiani’s identity is brought up. In the
fifth chapter of that treatise, Pier Damiani asserts—against
Aristotle and against Fredegarius de Tours—that it is within
God’s power to make what once was into something that
has never been. Reading those old theological discussions, I
began to understand don Pedro Damián’s tragic story.

This is my solution. Damián handled himself like a
coward on the battlefield at Masoller and spent the rest of
his life setting right that shameful weakness. He returned to
Entre Ríos; he never lifted a hand against another man, he
never cut anyone up, he never sought fame as a man of
courage. Instead, living out there in the hill country of
Ñancay and struggling with the backwoods and with wild
cattle, he made himself tough, hard. Probably without realizing it, he was preparing the way for the miracle. He
thought from his innermost self, If destiny brings me another battle, I’ll be ready for it. For forty years he waited
and waited, with an inarticulate hope, and then, in the end,
at the hour of his death, fate brought him his battle. It
came in the form of delirium, for, as the Greeks knew, we
are all shadows of a dream. In his final agony he lived his
battle over again, conducted himself as a man, and in
heading the last charge he was struck by a bullet in the
middle of the chest. And so, in 1946, through the working
out of a long, slow-burning passion, Pedro Damián died in
the defeat at Masoller, which took place between winter
and spring in 1904.

In the Summa Theologiae, it is denied that God can
unmake the past, but nothing is said of the complicated
concatenation of causes and effects which is so vast and so
intimate that perhaps it might prove impossible to annul a
single
remote fact, insignificant as it may seem, without
invalidating the present. To modify the past is not to
modify a single fact; it is to annul the consequences of that
fact, which tend to be infinite. In other words, it involves
the creation of two universal histories. In the first, let us
say, Pedro Damián died in Entre Ríos in 1946; in the
second, at Masoller in 1904. It is this second history that
we are living now, but the suppression of the first was not
immediate and produced the odd contradictions that I have
related. It was in Colonel Dionisio Tabares that the different stages took place. At first, he remembered that Damián
acted as a coward; next, he forgot him entirely; then he
remembered Damián’s fearless death. No less illuminating
is the case of the foreman Abaroa; he had to die, as I
understand it, because he held too many memories of don
Pedro Damián.

As for myself, I do not think I am running a similar risk.
I have guessed at and set down a process beyond man’s
understanding, a kind of exposure of reason; but there are
certain circumstances that lessen the dangers of this privilege of mine. For the present, I am not sure of having
always written the truth. I suspect that in my story there
are a few false memories. It is my suspicion that Pedro
Damián (if he ever existed) was not called Pedro Damián
and that I remember him by that name so as to believe
someday that the whole story was suggested to me by Pier
Damiani’s thesis. Something similar happens with the poem
I mentioned in the first paragraph, which centers around
the irrevocability of the past. A few years from now, I shall
believe I made up a fantastic tale, and I will actually have
recorded an event that was real, just as some two thousand
years ago in all innocence Virgil believed he was setting
down the birth of a man and foretold the birth of Christ.

Poor Damián! Death carried him off at the age of twenty
in a local battle of a sad and little-known war, but in the
end he got what he longed for in his heart, and he was a
long time getting it, and perhaps there is no greater happiness.
Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari,
Dead in His Labyrinth

(1949)

. . . like the spider, which
builds itself a feeble house.

The Koran, xxix, 40

“This,” said Dunraven with a sweeping gesture that did not
fail to embrace the misty stars while it took in the bleak
moor, the sea, the dunes, and an imposing, tumbledown
building that somehow suggested a stable long since fallen
into disrepair, “this is the land of my forebears.”

Unwin, his companion, drew the pipe out of his mouth
and made some faint sounds of approval. It was the first
summer evening of 1914; weary of a world that lacked the
dignity of danger, the two friends set great value on these
far reaches of Cornwall. Dunraven cultivated a dark beard
and thought of himself as the author of a substantial epic,
which his contemporaries would barely be able to scan and
whose subject had not yet been revealed to him; Unwin
had published a paper on the theory supposed to have been
written by Fermat in the margin of a page of Diophantus.
Both men—need it be said?—were young, dreamy, and passionate.

“It’s
about
a
quarter
of
a
century
ago
now,”
said
Dun
raven, “that Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, chief or king of I
don’t know what Nilotic tribe, died in the central room of
this house at the hands of his cousin Zaid. After all these
years, the facts surrounding his death are still unclear.”
Unwin, as was expected of him, asked why.

“For several reasons,” was the answer. “In the first
place, this house is a labyrinth. In the second place, it was
watched over by a slave and a lion. In the third place, a
hidden treasure vanished. In the fourth place, the murderer
was dead when the murder happened. In the fifth place—”
Tired out, Unwin stopped him.

“Don’t go on multiplying the mysteries,” he said. “They
should be kept simple. Bear in mind Poe’s purloined letter,
bear in mind Zangwill’s locked room.”

“Or made complex,” replied Dunraven. “Bear in mind
the universe.”

Climbing the steep dunes, they had reached the labyrinth. It seemed to them, up close, a straight and almost
endless wall of unplastered brick, barely higher than a
man’s head. Dunraven said that the building had the shape
of a circle, but so wide was this circle that its curve was
almost invisible. Unwin recollected Nicholas of Cusa, to
whom a straight line was the arc of an infinite circle. They
walked on and on, and along about midnight discovered a
narrow opening that led into a blind, unsafe passage. Dunraven said that inside the house were many branching ways
but that, by turning always to the left, they would reach
the very center of the network in little more than an hour.
Unwin assented. Their cautious footsteps resounded off the
stone-paved floor; the corridor branched into other, narrower corridors. The roof was very low, making the house seem
to want to imprison them, and they had to walk one behind
the other through the complex dark. Unwin went ahead,
forced to slacken the pace because of the rough masonry
and the many turns. The unseen wall flowed on by his
hand, endlessly. Unwin, slow in the blackness, heard from
his friend’s lips the tale of the death of Ibn Hakkan.

“Perhaps
the
oldest
of
my
memories,”
Dunraven
said,
“is
the one of Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari in the port of Pentreath.
At his heels followed a black man with a lion—
unquestionably they were the first black man and the first
lion my eyes had ever seen, outside of engravings from the
Bible. I was a boy then, but the beast the color of the sun
and the man the color of night impressed me less than Ibn
Hakkan himself. To me, he seemed very tall; he was a man
with sallow skin, half-shut black eyes, an insolent nose,
fleshy lips, a saffron-colored beard, a powerful chest, and a
way of walking that was self-assured and silent. At home, I
said, ‘A king has come on a ship.’ Later, when the bricklayers were at work here, I broadened his title and dubbed
him King of Babel.

“The news that this stranger would settle in Pentreath
was received with welcome, but the scale and shape of his
house aroused disapproval and bewilderment. It was not
right that a house should consist of a single room and of
miles and miles of corridors. ‘Among foreigners such houses
might be common,’ people said, ‘but hardly here in England.’ Our rector, Mr. Allaby, a man with out-of-the-way
reading habits, exhumed an Eastern story of a king whom
the Divinity had punished for having built a labyrinth, and
he told this story from the pulpit. The very next day, Ibn
Hakkan paid a visit to the rectory; the circumstances of
the brief interview were not known at the time, but no
further sermon alluded to the sin of pride, and the Moor
was able to go on contracting masons. Years afterward,
when Ibn Hakkan was dead, Allaby stated to the authorities the substance of their conversation.

“Ibn Hakkan, refusing a chair, had told him these or
similar words: ‘No man can place judgment upon what I
am doing now. My sins are such that were I to invoke for
hundreds upon hundreds of years the Ultimate Name of
God, this would be powerless to set aside the least of my
torments; my sins are such that were I to kill you, Reverend Allaby, with these very hands, my act would not
increase even slightly the torments that Infinite Justice
holds in store for me. There is no land on earth where my
name is unknown. I am Ibn Hakkan al-Bokhari, and in my
day I ruled over the tribes of the desert with a rod of iron.
For years and years, with the help of my cousin Zaid, I
trampled them underfoot until God heard their outcry and
suffered them to rebel against me. My armies were broken
and put to the sword; I succeeded in escaping with the
wealth I had accumulated during my reign of plunder. Zaid
led me to the tomb of a holy man, at the foot of a stone
hill. I ordered my slave to watch the face of the desert.
Zaid and I went inside with our chest of gold coins and
slept, utterly worn out. That night, I believed that a tangle
of snakes had trapped me. I woke up in horror. By my
side, in the dawn, Zaid lay asleep; a spider web against my
flesh had made me dream that dream. It pained me that
Zaid, who was a coward, should be sleeping so restfully. I
reflected that the wealth was not infinite and that Zaid
might wish to claim part of it for himself. In my belt was
my silver-handled dagger; I slipped it from its sheath and
pierced his throat with it. In his agony, he muttered words
I could not make out. I looked at him. He was dead, but,
fearing that he might rise up, I ordered my slave to obliterate the dead man’s face with a heavy rock. Then we wandered under the sun, and one day we spied a sea. Very tall
ships plowed a course through it. I thought that a dead man
would be unable to make his way over such waters, and I
decided to seek other lands. The first night after we sailed,
I dreamed that I killed Zaid. Everything was exactly the
same, but this time I understood his words. He said: “As
you now kill me, I shall one day kill you, wherever you
may hide.” I have sworn to avert that threat. I shall bury
myself in the heart of a labyrinth so that Zaid?s ghost will
lose its way.’

“After having said this, he went away. Allaby did his
best to think that the Moor was mad and that his absurd
labyrinth was a symbol and a clear mark of his madness.
Then he reflected that this explanation agreed with the
extravagant building and with the extravagant story but not
with the strong impression left by the man Ibn Hakkan.
Who knew whether such tales might not be common in the
sand wastes of Egypt, who knew whether such queer things
corresponded (like Pliny’s dragons) less to a person than to
a culture? On a visit to London, Allaby combed back numbers of the Times; he verified the fact of the uprising and
of the subsequent downfall of al-Bokhari and of his vizier,
whose cowardice was well known.

“Al-Bokhari, as soon as the bricklayers had finished,
installed himself in the center of the labyrinth. He was not
seen again in the town; at times, Allaby feared that Zaid
had caught up with the king and killed him. At night, the
wind carried to us the growling of the lion, and the sheep in
their pens pressed together with an ancient fear.

“It was customary for ships from Eastern ports, bound
for Cardiff or Bristol, to anchor in the little bay. The slave
used to go down from the labyrinth (which at that time, I
remember, was not its present rose color but was crimson)
and exchanged guttural-sounding words with the ships’
crews, and he seemed to be looking among the men for the
vizier’s ghost. It was no secret that these vessels carried
cargoes of contraband, and if of alcohol or of forbidden
ivories, why not of dead men as well?

“Some three years after the house was finished, the Rose
of Sharon
anchored one October morning just under the
bluffs. I was not among those who saw this sailing ship, and
perhaps the image of it I hold in my mind is influenced by
forgotten prints of Aboukir or of Trafalgar, but I believe it
was among that class of ships so minutely detailed that
they seem less the work of a shipbuilder than of a carpenter, and less of a carpenter than of a cabinetmaker. It was
(if not in reality, at least in my dreams) polished, dark,
fast, and silent, and its crew was made up of Arabs and
Malayans.

“It anchored at dawn, and in the late afternoon of that
same day Ibn Hakkan burst into the rectory to see Allaby.
He was dominated—completely dominated—by a passion of
fear, and was scarcely able to make it clear that Zaid had
entered the labyrinth and that his slave and his lion had
already been killed. He asked in all seriousness whether the
authorities might be able to help him. Before Allaby could
say a word, al-Bokhari was gone—as if torn away by the
same terror that had brought him for the second and last
time to the rectory. Alone in his library, Allaby reflected in
amazement that this fear-ridden man had kept down
Sudanese tribes by the knife, knew what a battle was, and
knew what it was to kill. Allaby found out the next day that
the boat had already set sail (bound for the Red Sea port
of Suakin, he later learned). Feeling it was his duty to
verify the death of the slave, he made his way up to the
labyrinth. Al-Bokhari’s breathless tale seemed to him utterly fantastic, but at one turn of the corridor he came upon
the lion, and the lion was dead, and at another turn there
was the slave, who was also dead, and in the central room
he found al-Bokhari—with his face obliterated. At the man’s
feet was a small chest inlaid with mother-of-pearl; the lock
had been forced, and not a single coin was left.”

Dunraven’s final sentences, underlined by rhetorical
pauses, were meant to be impressive; Unwin guessed that
his friend had gone over them many times before, always
with the same confidence—and with the same flatness of
effect. He asked, in order to feign interest, “How were the
lion and the slave killed?”

The relentless voice went on with a kind of gloomysatisfaction, “Their faces were also bashed in.”

A muffled sound of rain was now added to the sound of
the men’s steps. Unwin realized that they would have to
spend the night in the labyrinth, in the central chamber,
but that in time this uncomfortable experience could be
looked back on as an adventure. He kept silent. Dunraven
could not restrain himself, and asked, in the manner of one
who wants to squeeze the last drop, “Can this story be
explained?”

Unwin answered, as though thinking aloud, “I have no
idea whether it can be explained or not. I only know it’s a
lie.”

Dunraven broke out in a torrent of strongly flavored
language and said that all the population of Pentreath
could bear witness to the truth of what he had told and
that if he had to make up a story, he was a writer after all
and could easily have invented a far better one. No less
astonished than Dunraven, Unwin apologized. Time in the
darkness seemed more drawn out; both men began to fear
they had gone astray, and were feeling their tiredness when
a faint gleam of light from overhead revealed the lower
steps of a narrow staircase. They climbed up and came to a
round room that lay in ruin. Two things were left that
attested to the fear of the ill-starred king: a slit of a
window that looked out onto the moors and the sea, and a
trapdoor in the floor that opened above the curve of the
stairway. The room, though spacious, had about it something of a prison cell.

Less because of the rain than because of a wish to have a
ready anecdote for friends, the two men spent the night in
the labyrinth. The mathematician slept soundly; not so the
poet, who was hounded by verses that his judgment knew
to be worthless:

Faceless the sultry and overpowering lion,
Faceless the stricken slave, faceless the king.

Unwin felt that the story of al-Bokhari’s death had left
him indifferent, but he woke up with the conviction of
having unraveled it. All that day, he was preoccupied and
unsociable, trying to fit the pieces of the puzzle together,
and two nights later he met Dunraven in a pub back in
London and said to him these or similar words: “In Cornwall, I said your story was a lie. The facts
were true, or
could be thought of as true, but told the way you told them
they were obviously lies. I will begin with the greatest lie of
all—with the unbelievable labyrinth. A fugitive does not
hide himself in a maze. He does not build himself a labyrinth on a bluff overlooking the sea, a crimson labyrinth that
can be sighted from afar by any ship’s crew. He has no need
to
erect
a
labyrinth
when
the
whole
world
already
is
one.
For anyone who really wants to hide away, London is a
better labyrinth than a lookout tower to which all the
corridors of a building lead. The simple observation I have
just propounded to you came to me the night before last
while we were listening to the rain on the roof and were
waiting for sleep to fall upon us. Under its influence, I
chose to put aside your absurdities and to think about
something sensible.”

“About the theory of series, say, or about a fourth dimension of space?” asked Dunraven.

“No,” said Unwin, serious. “I thought about the labyrinth of Crete. The labyrinth whose center was a man with
the head of a bull.”

Dunraven, steeped in detective stories, thought that the
solution of a mystery is always less impressive than the
mystery itself. Mystery has something of the supernatural
about it, and even of the divine; its solution, however, is
always tainted by sleight of hand. He said, to put off the
inevitable, “On coins and in sculpture the Minotaur has a
bull’s head. Dante imagined it as having the body of a bull
and a man’s head.”

“That version also fits my solution,” Unwin agreed.
“What matters is that both the dwelling and the dweller be
monstrous. The Minotaur amply justifies its maze. The
same can hardly be said of a threat uttered in a dream. The
Minotaur’s image once evoked (unavoidably, of course, in a
mystery in which there is a labyrinth), the problem was
virtually solved. Nonetheless, I confess I did not fully
understand that this ancient image held the key, but in
your story I found a detail I could use—the spider web.”
“The spider web?” repeated Dunraven, baffled.

“Yes. It wouldn’t surprise me at all if the spider web
(the Platonic spider web—let’s keep this straight) may have
suggested to the murderer (for there is a murderer) his
crime. You remember that al-Bokhari, in the tomb,
dreamed about a tangle of snakes, and upon waking found
that a spider web had prompted his dream. Let us go back to
that night in which al-Bokhari had that dream. The defeated king and the vizier and the slave are escaping over
the desert with treasure. They take shelter for the night in
a tomb. The vizier, whom we know to be a coward, sleeps;
the king, whom we know to be a brave man, does not sleep.
In order not to share the treasure, the king knifes the
vizier. Several nights later, the vizier’s ghost threatens the
king in a dream. All this is unconvincing. To my understanding, the events took place in another way. That night,
the king, the brave man, slept, and Zaid, the coward, lay
awake. To sleep is to forget all things, and this particular
forgetfulness is not easy when you know you are being
hunted down with drawn swords. Zaid, greedy, bent over
the sleeping figure of his king. He thought about killing
him (maybe he even played with his dagger), but he did
not dare. He woke the napping slave, they buried part of
the treasure in the tomb, and they fled to Suakin and to
England. Not to hide themselves from al-Bokhari but to
lure him and to kill him, they built—like the spider its
web—the crimson labyrinth on the high dunes in sight of the
sea. The vizier knew that ships would carry to Nubian
ports the tale of the red-bearded man, of the slave, and of
the lion, and that sooner or later al-Bokhari would come in
search of them in their labyrinth. In the last passageway of
the maze, the trap lay waiting. Al-Bokhari had always
underrated Zaid, and now did not lower himself to take the
slightest precaution. At last, the wished-for day came; Ibn
Hakkan landed in England, went directly to the door of the
maze, made his way into its blind corridors, and perhaps
had already set foot on the first steps when his vizier killed
him—I don’t know whether with a bullet—from the trapdoor
in the ceiling. The slave would finish off the lion and
another bullet would finish off the slave. Then Zaid crushed
the three faces with a rock. He had to do it that way; one
dead man with his face bashed in would have suggested a
problem of identity, but the beast, the black man, and the
king formed a series, and, given the first two terms, the last
one would seem natural. It is not to be wondered at that he
was driven by fear when he  spoke to Allaby; he had just finished his awful job and was about to flee England and
unearth the treasure.”

A thoughtful silence, or disbelief, followed Unwin’s
words. Dunraven asked for another tankard before giving
his judgment.

“I admit,” he said, “that my Ibn Hakkan could have
been Zaid. Such metamorphoses are classic rules of the
game, are accepted conventions
demanded by the reader.
What I am unwilling to admit is your conjecture that a
part of the treasure remained in the Sudan. Remember that
Zaid fled from the king and from the king’s enemies both;
it is easier to picture him stealing the whole hoard than
taking the time to bury a portion of it. At the very end,
perhaps no coins were found in the chest because no coins
were left. The bricklayers would have eaten up a fortune
that, unlike the red gold of the Nibelungs, was not inexhaustible. And so we have Ibn Hakkan crossing the seas in
order to recover a treasure already squandered.”

“I shouldn’t say squandered,” Unwin said. “The vizier
invested it, putting together on an island of infidels a great
circular trap made of brick and destined not only to lure a
king but to be his grave. Zaid, if your guess is correct,
acted out of hate and fear, and not out of greed. He stole
the treasure, and only later found that he was really after
something else. He really wanted to see Ibn Hakkan dead.
He pretended to be Ibn Hakkan, he killed Ibn Hakkan,
and in the end he became Ibn Hakkan.”

“Yes,” agreed Dunraven. “He was a good-for-nothing
who, before becoming a nobody in death, wanted one day
to look back on having been a king or having been taken
for a king.”
The Man
on the Threshold

(1952)

Bioy-Casares brought back with him from London a strange
dagger with a triangular blade and a hilt in the shape of an
H; a friend of ours, Christopher Dewey of the British
Council, told us that such weapons were commonly used in
India. This statement prompted him to mention that he
had held a job in that country between the two wars.
(“Ultra Auroram et Gangen,” I recall his saying in Latin,
misquoting a line from Juvenal.) Of the stories he entertained us with that night, I venture to set down the one
that follows. My account will be faithful; may Allah deliver
me
from the temptation of adding any circumstantial details or of weighing down the tale’s Oriental character with
interpolations from Kipling. It should be remarked that the
story has a certain ancient simplicity that it would be a
pity to lose—something perhaps straight out of the Arabian
Nights.

The precise geography [Dewey said] of the events I am
going to relate is of little importance. Besides, what would the names of Amritsar or Oudh mean in Buenos Aires? Let
me only say, then, that in those years there were disturbances in a Muslim city and that the central government
sent out one of their best people to restore order. He was a
Scotsman from an illustrious clan of warriors, and in his
blood he bore a tradition of violence. Only once did I lay
eyes on him, but I shall not forget his deep black hair, the
prominent cheekbones, the somehow avid nose and mouth,
the broad shoulders, the powerful set of a Viking. David
Alexander Glencairn is what he’ll be called in my story
tonight; the names are fitting, since they belonged to kings
who ruled with an iron scepter. David Alexander Glencairn
(as I shall have to get used to calling him) was, I suspect,
a man who was feared; the mere news of his coming was
enough to quell the city. This did not deter him from
putting into effect a number of forceful measures. A few
years passed. The city and the outlying district were at
peace; Sikhs and Muslims had laid aside their ancient
enmities, and suddenly Glencairn disappeared. Naturally
enough, there was no lack of rumors that he had been
kidnapped or murdered.

These things I learned from my superior, for the censorship was strict and the newspapers made no comment on
(nor did they even record, for all I recall) Glencairn’s
disappearance. There’s a saying that India is larger than
the world; Glencairn, who may have been all powerful in
the city to which he was destined by a signature scrawled
across the bottom of some document, was no more than a
cog in the administration of Empire. The inquiries of the
local police turned up nothing; my superior felt that a
civilian might rouse less suspicion and achieve greater results. Three or four days later (distances in India are
generous), I was appointed to my mission and was working
my way without hope of success through the streets of the
commonplace city that had somehow whisked away a man.

I felt, almost at once, the invisible presence of a conspiracy to keep Glencairn’s fate hidden. There’s not a soul in
this city (I suspected) who is not in on the secret and who is
not sworn to keep it. Upon being questioned, most people
professed an unbounded ignorance; they did not know who
Glencairn was, had never seen him, had never heard anyone
speak of him. Others, instead, had caught a glimpse of him
only a quarter of an hour before talking to So-and-So, and
they even accompanied me to the house the two had entered and in which nothing was known of them, or which
they had just that moment left. Some of those meticulous
liars I went so far as to knock down. Witnesses approved
my outbursts, and made up other lies. I did not believe
them, but neither did I dare ignore them. One afternoon, I
was handed an envelope containing a slip of paper on which
there was an address.

The sun had gone down when I got there. The quarter
was poor but not rowdy; the house was quite low; from the
street I caught a glimpse of a succession of unpaved inner
courtyards, and somewhere at the far end an opening.
There, some kind of Muslim ceremony was being held; a
blind man entered with a lute made of a reddish wood.

At my feet, motionless as an object, an old, old man
squatted on the threshold. I’ll tell what he was like, for he
is an essential part of the story. His many years had worn
him down and polished him as smooth as water polishes a
stone, or as the generations of men polish a sentence. Long
rags covered him, or so it seemed to me, and the cloth he
wore wound around his head was one rag more. In the
dusk, he lifted a dark face and a white beard. I began
speaking to him without preamble, for by now I had given
up all hope of ever finding David Alexander Glencairn. The
old man did not understand me (perhaps he did not hear
me), and I had to explain that Glencairn was a judge and
that I was looking for him. I felt, on speaking these words,
the pointlessness of questioning this old man for whom the
present was hardly more than a dim rumor. This man
might give me news of the Mutiny or of Akbar (I thought)
but not of Glencairn. What he told me confirmed this
suspicion.

“A judge!” he cried with weak surprise. “A judge who
has got himself lost and is being searched for. That happened when I was a boy. I have no memory for dates, but
Nikal Seyn (Nicholson) had not yet been killed before the
wall of Delhi. Time that has passed stays on in memory; I
may be able to summon back what happened then. God, in
his wrath, had allowed people to fall into corruption; the
mouths of men were full of blasphemy and of deceit and of
fraud. Yet not all were evil, and when it was known that the
queen was about to send a man who would carry out in this
land the law of England, those who were less evil were
cheered, for they felt that law is better than disorder. The
Christian came to us, but it was not long before he too was
deceiving and oppressing us, concealing abominable crimes,
and selling decisions. We did not blame him in the beginning; the English justice he administered was not familiar
to anyone, and the apparent excesses of the new judge may
have obeyed certain valid arcane reasoning. Everything must
have a justification in his book, we wished to think, but his
kinship with all evil judges the world over was too obvious
to be overlooked, and at last we were forced to admit that
he was simply a wicked man. He turned out to be a tyrant,
and the unfortunate people (in order to avenge themselves
for the false hopes they had once placed in him) began to
toy with the idea of kidnapping him and submitting him to
judgment. To talk was not enough; from plans they had to
move to action. Nobody, perhaps, save the very foolish or
the very young, believed that that rash scheme could be
carried out, but thousands of Sikhs and Muslims kept their
word and one day they executed—incredulous—what to each
of them had seemed impossible. They sequestered the judge
and held him prisoner in a farmhouse beyond the outskirts
of the town. Then they called together all those who had
been wronged by him, or, in some cases, orphans and
widows, for during those years the executioner’s sword had
not rested. In the end—this was perhaps the most difficult—
they sought and named a judge to judge the judge.”

At
this
point,
the
old
man
was
interrupted
by
some
women who were entering the house. Then he went on,
slowly.

“It is well known that there is no generation that does
not include in it four upright men who are the secret pillars
of the world and who justify it before the Lord: one of these
men would have made the perfect judge. But where are
they to be found if they themselves wander the world lost
and nameless, and do not know each other when they meet,
and are unaware of the high destiny that is theirs? Someone then reasoned that if fate forbade us wise men, we
should seek out the witless. This opinion prevailed. Students of the Koran, doctors of law, Sikhs who bear the
name of lions and who worship one God, Hindus who
worship a multitude of gods, Mahavira monks who teach
that the shape of the universe is that of a man with his legs
spread apart, worshipers of fire, and black Jews made up
the court, but the final ruling was entrusted to a madman.”

Here he was interrupted by people who were leaving the
ceremony.

“To a madman,” he repeated, “so that God’s wisdom
might speak through his mouth and shame human pride.
His name has been forgotten, or was never known, but he
went naked through the streets, or was clothed in rags,
counting his fingers with a thumb and mocking at the
trees.”

My common sense rebelled. I said that to hand over the
verdict to a madman was to nullify the trial.

“The defendant accepted the judge,” was his answer,
“seeing, perhaps, that because of the risk the conspirators
would run if they set him free, only from a man who was
mad might he not expect a sentence of death. I heard that
he laughed when he was told who the judge was. The trial
lasted many days and nights, drawn out by the swelling of
the number of witnesses.”

The old man stopped. Something was troubling him. In
order to bridge the lapse, I asked him how many days.

“At least nineteen,” he replied.

People who were leaving the ceremony interrupted him
again; wine is forbidden to Muslims, but the faces and
voices were those of drunkards. One, on passing, shouted
something to the old man.

“Nineteen days—exactly,” he said, setting matters
straight. “The faithless dog heard sentence passed, and
the knife feasted on his throat.”

He had spoken fiercely, joyfully. With a different voice
now he brought the story to an end. “He died without fear;
In the most vile of men there is some virtue.”

“Where did all this happen?” I asked him, “In a farmhouse?”

For the first time, he looked into my eyes. Then he made
things clear, slowly, measuring his words. “I said that he
had been confined in a farmhouse, not that he was tried
there. He was tried in this city, in a house like any other,
like this one. One house differs little from another; what is
important to know is whether the house is built in hell or in
heaven.”

I asked him about the fate of the conspirators.

“I don’t know,” he told me patiently. “These things took
place and were forgotten many years ago now. Maybe what
they did was condemned by men, but not by the Lord.”
Having said this, he got up. I felt his words as a dismissal, and from that moment I no longer existed for him. Men
and women from all the corners of the Punjab swarmed
over us, praying and intoning, and nearly swept us away. I
wondered how, from courtyards so narrow they were little
more than long passageways, so many persons could be
pouring out. Others were coming from the neighboring
houses; it seems they had leaped over the walls. By shoving
and cursing, I forced my way inside. At the heart of the
innermost courtyard I came upon a naked man, crowned
with yellow flowers, whom everyone kissed and caressed,
with a sword in his hand. The sword was stained, for it had
dealt Glencairn his death. I found his mutilated body in
the stables out back.
The Challenge

(1952)

All over the Argentine runs a story that may belong to
legend or to history or (which may be just another way of
saying it belongs to legend) to both things at once. Its best
recorded versions are to be found in the unjustly forgotten
novels about outlaws and desperadoes written in the last
century by Eduardo Gutiérrez; among its oral versions, the
first one I heard came from a neighborhood of Buenos Aires
bounded by a penitentiary, a river, and a cemetery, and
nicknamed Tierra del Fuego. The hero of this version was
Juan Muraña, a wagon driver and knife fighter to whom are
attributed all the stories of daring that still survive in what
were once the outskirts of the city’s Northside. That first
version was quite simple. A man from the Stockyards or
from Barracas, knowing about Muraña’s reputation (but
never having laid eyes on him), sets out all the way across
town from the Southside to take him on. He picks the fight
in
a
corner
saloon,
and
the
two
move
into
the
street
to
have
it out. Each is wounded, but in the end Muraña slashes the
other man’s face and tells him, “I’m letting you live so
you’ll come back looking for me again.”

What impressed itself in my mind about the duel was
that it had no ulterior motive. In conversation thereafter
(my friends know this only too well), I grew fond of
retelling the anecdote. Around 1927, I wrote it down,
giving it the deliberately laconic title “Men Fought.” Years
later, this same anecdote helped me work out a lucky
story—though hardly a good one—called “Streetcorner
Man.” Then, in 1950, Adolfo Bioy-Casares and I made use
of it again to plot a film script that the producers turned
down and that would have been called On the Outer Edge.
It was about hard-bitten men like Muraña who lived on the
outskirts of Buenos Aires before the turn of the century. I
thought, after such extensive labors, that I had said farewell to the story of the disinterested duel. Then, this year,
out in Chivilcoy, I came across a far better version. I hope
this is the true one, although since fate seems to take
pleasure in a thing’s happening many times over, both may
very well be authentic. Two quite bad stories and a script
that I still think of as good came out of the poorer first
version; out of the second, which is complete and perfect,
nothing can come. Without working in metaphors or details
of local color, I shall tell it now as it was told to me. The
story took place to the west, in the district of Chivilcoy,
sometime back in the 1870’s.

The hero’s name is Wenceslao Suárez. He earns his
wages braiding ropes and making harnesses, and lives in a
small adobe hut. Forty or fifty years old, he’s a man who
has won a reputation for courage, and it is quite likely
(given the facts of the story) that he has a killing or two to
his credit. But these killings, because they were in fair
fights, neither trouble his conscience nor tarnish his good
name. One evening, something out of the ordinary happens
in the routine life of this man: at a crossroads saloon, he is
told that a letter has come for him. Don Wenceslao does
not know how to read; the saloonkeeper puzzles out word
by word an epistle certainly not written by the man who
sent it. In the name of certain friends, who value dexterity
and true composure, an unknown correspondent sends his
compliments to don Wenceslao, whose renown has crossed
over the Arroyo del Medio into the Province of Santa Fe,
and extends him the hospitality of his humble home in a
town of the said province. Wenceslao Suárez dictates a
reply to the saloonkeeper. Thanking the other man for his
expression of friendship, and explaining that he dare not
leave his mother—who is well along in years—alone, he invites the other man to his own place in Chivilcoy, where a
barbecue and a bottle or so of wine may be looked forward
to. The months drag by, and one day a man riding a horse
harnessed and saddled in a style unknown in the area inquires at the saloon for the way to Suárez’ house. Suárez,
who has come to the saloon to buy meat, overhears the
question and tells the man who he is. The stranger reminds
him of the letters they exchanged some time back. Suárez
shows his pleasure that the other man has gone to the
trouble of making the journey; then the two of them go off
into a nearby field and Suárez prepares the barbecue. They
eat and drink and talk at length. About what? I suspect
about subjects involving blood and cruelty—but with each
man on his guard, wary.

They have eaten, and the oppressive afternoon heat
weighs over the land when the stranger invites don
Wenceslao to join in a bit of harmless knife play. To say no
would dishonor the host. They fence, and at first they only
play at fighting, but it’s not long before Wenceslao feels
that the stranger is out to kill him. Realizing at last what
lay behind the ceremonious letter, Wenceslao regrets having
eaten and drunk so much. He knows he will tire before the
other man, on whom he has a good nine or ten years. Out of
scorn or politeness, the stranger offers him a short rest. Don
Wenceslao agrees and, as soon as they take up their dueling
again, he allows the other man to wound him on the left hand, in which he holds his rolled poncho.* The knife slices
through his wrist, the hand dangles loose. Suárez, springing
back, lays the bleeding hand on the ground, clamps it down
under his boot, tears it off, feints a thrust at the amazed
stranger’s chest, then rips open his belly with a solid stab.
So the story ends, except that, according to one teller, the
man from Santa Fe is left lifeless, while to another (who
withholds from him the dignity of death) he rides back to
his own province. In this latter version, Suárez gives him
first aid with the rum remaining from their lunch.

In this feat of Manco (One Hand) Wenceslao—as Suárez
is now known to fame—certain touches of mildness or politeness (his trade as harness and rope maker, his qualms
about leaving his mother alone, the exchange of flowery
letters, the two men’s leisurely conversation, the lunch)
happily tone down and make the barbarous tale more effective. These touches lend it an epic and even chivalrous
quality that we hardly find, for example—unless we have
made up our minds to do so—in the drunken brawls of
Martín Fierro
or in the closely related but poorer story of
Juan Muraña and the man from the Southside. A trait
common to the two may, perhaps, be significant. In both of
them, the challenger is defeated. This may be due to the
mere and unfortunate necessity for the local champion to
triumph, but also (and this is preferable) to a tacit disapproval of aggression, or (which would be best of all) to the
dark and tragic suspicion that man is the worker of his own
downfall, like Ulysses in Canto XXVI of the Inferno
or
like that other doomed captain in Moby Dick.

* Montaigne (Essays, I, 49) says that this manner of fighting with cloak
and dagger is very old, and quotes Caesar’s finding, “Sinistras sagis involvunt,
gladiosque distringunt”—“They wrapped their cloaks around their left
arms and drew their swords” (Civil War, I, 75). Lugones, in El payador
(1916), quotes these verses from a sixteenth-century romance
of Bernardo
del Carpio:

Revolviendo el manto al brazo,
la espada fuera a sacar.

[Wrapping the cape round his arm, he drew his sword.]
Something fundamental in the brutal story just told
saves it from falling into unalloyed barbarousness—an episode out of La Terre
or Hemingway. I speak of a religious
core. “His beliefs,” said the poet Lugones of the gaucho,
“could be reduced to a few superstitions, which had no
great bearing on his everyday life.” He then adds, “The
one thing he respected was courage, which he cultivated
with a chivalrous passion.” I would say that the gaucho,
without realizing it, forged a religion—the hard and blind
religion of courage—and that this faith (like all others) had
its ethic, its mythology, and its martyrs. On the plains and
out on the raw edges of the city, men who led extremely
elementary lives—herders, stockyard workers, drovers, outlaws, and pimps—rediscovered in their own way the age-oldcult of the gods of iron. In a thirteenth-century saga, we
read:

“Tell me, what do you believe in?” said the earl.
“I believe in my own strength,” said Sigmund.

Wenceslao Suárez and his nameless antagonist, and many
others whom myth has forgotten or has absorbed in these
two, doubtless held this manly faith, and in all likelihood it
was no mere form of vanity but rather an awareness that
God may be found in any man.
The Captive

(1956)

This story is told out in one of the old frontier towns—either
Junín or Tapalquén. A boy was missing after an Indian
raid; it was said that the marauders had carried him away.
The boy’s parents searched for him without any luck; yearslater, a soldier just back from Indian territory told them
about a blue-eyed savage who may have been their son. At
long last they traced him (the circumstances of the search
have not come down to us and I dare not invent what I
don’t know) and they thought they recognized him. The
man, marked by the wilderness and by primitive life, no
longer understood the words of the language he spoke in
childhood, but he let himself be led, uncurious and willing,
to his old house. There he stopped—maybe because the
others stopped. He stared at the door as though not understanding what it was. All of a sudden, ducking his head, he
let out a cry, cut through the entranceway and the two long
patios on the run, and burst into the kitchen. Without a
second’s pause, he buried his arm in the soot-blackened
oven chimney and drew out the small knife with the horn
handle that he had hidden there as a boy. His eyes lit up
with joy and his parents wept because they had found their
lost child.

Maybe other memories followed upon this one, but the
Indian could not live indoors and one day he left to go
back to his open spaces. I would like to know what he felt
in that first bewildering moment in which past and present
merged; I would like to know whether in that dizzying
instant the lost son was born again and died, or whether he
managed to recognize, as a child or a dog might, his peopleand his home.
Borges and Myself

(1956)

It’s to the other man, to Borges, that things happen. I walk
along the streets of Buenos Aires, stopping now and then—
perhaps out of habit—to look at the arch of an old entranceway or a grillwork gate; of Borges I get news through the
mail and glimpse his name among a committee of professors
or in a dictionary of biography. I have a taste for hourglasses, maps, eighteenth-century typography, the roots of
words, the smell of coffee, and Stevenson’s prose; the other
man shares these likes, but in a showy way that turns them
into stagy mannerisms. It would be an exaggeration to say
that we are on bad terms; I live, I let myself live, so that
Borges can weave his tales and poems, and those tales and
poems are my justification. It is not hard for me to admit
that he has managed to write a few worthwhile pages, but
these pages cannot save me, perhaps because what is good
no longer belongs to anyone—not even the other man—but
rather to speech or tradition. In any case, I am fated to
become lost once and for all, and only some moment of
myself will survive in the other man. Little by little, I have
been surrendering everything to him, even though I have
evidence of his stubborn habit of falsification and exaggerating. Spinoza held that all things try to keep on being
themselves; a stone wants to be a stone and the tiger, a
tiger. I shall remain in Borges, not in myself (if it is so that
I am someone), but I recognize myself less in his books
than in those of others or than in the laborious tuning of a
guitar. Years ago, I tried ridding myself of him and I went
from myths of the outlying slums of the city to games with
time and infinity, but those games are now part of Borges
and I will have to turn to other things. And so, my life is a
running away, and I lose everything and everything is left
to oblivion or to the other man.

Which of us is writing this page I don’t know.
The Maker

(1958)

Until then, he had never dwelled on the pleasures of memory. Impressions had always washed over him, fleeting and
vivid. A potter’s design in vermilion; the vault of heaven
clustered with stars that were also gods; the moon, from
which a lion had fallen; the smoothness of marble under
one’s lingering fingertips; the taste of boar meat, which he
liked to strip with quick flashing bites; a Phoenician word;
the black shadow cast by a spear on yellow sand; the
nearness of the sea or of women; the heavy wine whose
roughness he cut with honey—any of these could wholly
encompass the range of his mind. He was acquainted with
fear as well as with anger and courage, and once he was the
first to scale an enemy wall. Eager, curious, unquestioning,
following no other law than to enjoy things and forget
them, he wandered over many lands and, on. one side or the
other of the sea, looked on the cities of men and their
palaces. In bustling marketplaces or at the foot of a mountain whose hidden peak may have sheltered satyrs, he had
heard entangled stories, which he accepted as he acceptedreality, without attempting to find out whether they were
true or imaginary.

Little by little, the beautiful world began to leave him; a
persistent mist erased the lines of his hand, the night lost
Its multitude of stars, the ground became uncertain beneath
his steps. Everything grew distant and blurred. When he
knew he was going blind, he cried out; stoic fortitude had
not yet been invented, and Hector could flee from Achilles
without dishonor. I shall no longer look upon the sky and
its mythological dread (he felt), nor this face which the
years will transform. Days and nights passed over these
fears of his body, but one morning he awoke, looked (without astonishment now) at the dim things around him, and
unexplainably felt—the way one recognizes a strain of music
or a voice—that all this had already happened to him and
that he had faced it with fear, but also with joy, hope, and
curiosity. Then he went deep into his past, which seemed to
him bottomless, and managed to draw out of that dizzying
descent the lost memory that now shone like a coin under
the rain, maybe because he had never recalled it before
except in some dream.

This was the memory. Another boy had wronged him and
he had gone to his father and told him the story. His
father, letting him speak, appeared not to listen or understand, and took down from the wall a bronze dagger, beautiful and charged with power, which in secret the boy had
coveted. Now it lay in his hands and the suddenness of
possession wiped out the injury he had suffered, but his
father’s
voice was telling him, “Let them know you’re a
man,” and in that voice was a command. Night blinded the
paths. Clasping the dagger, in which he felt a magic power,
he scrambled down the steep hillside that surrounded the
house and ran to the edge of the sea, thinking of himself as
Ajax and Perseus, and peopling with wounds and battles
the dark salt air. The exact taste of that moment was what
he now sought. The rest mattered little to him—the insults
leading to the challenge, the clumsy fight, the way home
with the blade dripping blood.

Another memory, also involving night and an expectation
of adventure, sprang out of that one. A woman, the first to
be given him by the gods, had waited for him in the shadow
of a crypt until he reached her through galleries that were
like nets of stone and down slopes that sank into darkness.
Why did these memories come back to him and why without bitterness, as if foretelling of things about to happen?

With slow amazement he understood. In this nighttime of
his mortal eyes into which he was now descending, love and
danger were also in wait for him—Ares and Aphrodite—
because he already divined (because he was already ringed
in by) a rumor of hexameters and glory, a rumor of men
defending a shrine which the gods would not save and of
black ships roaming the seas in search of a loved island, the
rumor of the Odysseys and the Iliads it was his destiny to
sing and to leave resounding forever in mankind’s hollow
memory. These things we know, but not what he felt when
he went down into his final darkness.
The Intruder

(1966)

. . . passing the love of women.
2 Samuel 1: 26

People say (but this is unlikely) that the story was first
told by Eduardo, the younger of the Nelsons, at the wake
of his elder brother Cristián, who died in his sleep sometime back in the nineties out in the district of Morón. The
fact is that someone got it from someone else during the
course of that drawn-out and now dim night, between one
sip of maté and the next, and told it to Santiago Dabove,
from whom I heard it. Years later, in Turdera, where the
story had taken place, I heard it again. The second and
more elaborate version closely followed the one Santiago
told, with the usual minor variations and discrepancies. I
set down the story now because I see in it, if I’m not
mistaken, a brief and tragic mirror of the character of those
hard-bitten men living on the edge of Buenos Aires before
the turn of the century. I hope to do this in a straightforward way, but I see in advance that I shall give in to the
writer’s temptation of emphasizing or adding certain details.
In Turdera, where they lived, they were called the
Nilsens. The priest there told me that his predecessor
remembered having seen in the house of these people—
somewhat in amazement—a worn Bible with a dark binding
and black-letter type; on the back flyleaf he caught a
glimpse of names and dates written in by hand. It was the
only book in the house—the roaming chronicle of the
Nilsens, lost as one day all things will be lost. The rambling
old house, which no longer stands, was of unplastered
brick; through the arched entranceway you could make out
a patio paved with red tiles and beyond it a second one of
hard-packed earth. Few people, at any rate, ever set foot
inside; the Nilsens kept to themselves. In their almost bare
rooms they slept on cots. Their extravagances were horses,
silver-trimmed riding gear, the short-bladed dagger, and
getting dressed up on Saturday nights, when they blew
their money freely and got themselves into boozy brawls.
They were both tall, I know, and wore their red hair long.
Denmark or Ireland, which they probably never heard of,
ran in the blood of these two Argentine brothers. The
neighborhood feared the Redheads; it is likely that one of
them, at least, had killed his man. Once, shoulder to shoulder, they tangled with the police. It is said that the younger
brother was in a fight with Juan Iberra in which he didn’t
do too badly, and that, according to those in the know, is saying something. They were drovers, teamsters, horse thieves,
and, once in a while, professional gamblers. They had
a reputation for stinginess, except when drink and cardplaying turned them into spenders. Of their relatives or
where they themselves came from, nothing is known. They
owned a cart and a yoke of oxen.

Their physical makeup differed from that of the rest of
the toughs who gave the Costa Brava its unsavory reputation. This, and a lot that we don’t know, helps us understand the close ties between them. To fall out with one of
them was to reckon with two enemies.

The Nilsens liked carousing with women, but up until
then their amorous escapades had always been carried out
in darkened passageways or in whorehouses. There was no
end of talk, then, when Cristián brought Juliana Burgos to
live with him. Admittedly, in this way he gained a servant,
but it is also true that he took to squandering his money
buying her the most hideous junk jewelry and showing her
off at parties. At those dingy parties held in tenements,
where suggestive dance steps were strictly forbidden and
where, at that time, partners still danced with a good six
inches of light showing between them. Juliana was a dark
girl and her eyes had a slight slant to them; all anyone had
to do was look at her and she’d break into a smile. For a
poor neighborhood, where drudgery and neglect wear women
out, she was not bad-looking.

In the beginning, Eduardo went places with them. Later,
at one point, he set out on a journey north to Arrecifes on
some business or other, returning home with a girl he had
picked up along the way. But after a few days he threw her
out. He turned more sullen; he took to drinking alone at
the corner saloon and kept completely to himself. He had
fallen in love with Cristián’s woman. The whole neighborhood, which may have realized it before he did, maliciously
and cheerfully looked forward to the enmity about to break
out between the two brothers.

Late one night, on coming home from the corner, Eduardo
saw Cristián’s horse, a big bay, tied to the hitching post.
Inside in the patio, dressed in his Sunday best, his older
brother was waiting for him. The woman shuttled in and
out serving maté. Cristián said to Eduardo, “I’m on my
way over to Farias’ place, where they’re throwing a party.
Juliana stays here with you; if you want her, use her.”

His tone was half commanding, half friendly. Eduardo
stood there a while staring at him, not knowing what to do.
Cristián got up, said goodbye—to his brother, not to Juliana, who was no more than an object—mounted his horse,
and rode off at a jog, casually.

From that night on they shared her. Nobody will ever
know
the
details
of
this
strange
partnership
which
outraged
even the Costa Brava’s sense of decency. The arrangement
went well for several weeks, but it could not last. Between
them the brothers never mentioned her name, not even to
call her, but they kept looking for, and finding, reasons to
be at odds. They argued over the sale of some hides, but
what they were really arguing about was something else.
Cristián took to raising his voice, while Eduardo kept
silent. Without knowing it, they were watching each other.
In tough neighborhoods a man never admits to anyone—not
even to himself—that a woman matters beyond lust and
possession, but the two brothers were in love. This, in some
way, made them feel ashamed.

One afternoon, in the square in Lomas, Eduardo ran into
Juan Iberra, who congratulated him on this beauty he’d got
hold of. It was then, I believe, that Eduardo let him have
it. Nobody—not to his
face—was going to poke fun at Cristián.

The woman attended both men’s wants with an animal
submission, but she was unable to keep hidden a certain
preference, probably for the younger man, who had not
refused sharing her but who had not proposed it either.

One day, they ordered Juliana to bring two chairs out
into the first patio and then not show her face for a while
because they had things to talk over. Expecting a long
session between them, she lay down for a nap, but before
very long they woke her up. She was to fill a sack with all
her belongings, including her glass-bead rosary and the tiny
crucifix her mother had left her. Without any explanation,
they lifted her onto the oxcart and set out on a long,
tiresome, and silent journey. It had rained; the roads were
heavy with mud, and it was nearly daybreak before they
reached Morón. There they sold her to the woman who
ran the whorehouse. The terms had already been agreed to;
Cristián pocketed the money and later on split it with his
brother.

Back in Turdera, the Nilsens, up till then trapped in the
web (which was also a routine) of this monstrous love
affair, tried to take up their old life of men among men.
They went back to cardplaying, to cockfights, to their
Saturday night binges. At times, perhaps, they felt they
were saved, but they often indulged—each on his own—in
unaccountable or only too accountable absences. A little
before the year was out, the younger brother said he had
business in the city. Immediately, Cristián went off to
Morón; at the hitching post of the whorehouse he recognized Eduardo’s piebald. Cristián walked in; there was his
brother, sure enough, waiting his turn. It is said that
Cristián told him, “If we go on this way, we’ll wear out the
horses. We’d be better off keeping her close at hand.”

He spoke with the owner of the place, drew a handful of
coins out of his money belt, and they took the girl away.
Juliana rode with Cristián. Eduardo dug his spurs into his
horse, not wanting to see them together.

They went back to what has already been told. Their
solution had ended in failure, for the two had fallen into
cheating. Cain was on the loose here, but the affection
between the Nilsens was great—who knows what hard times
and what dangers they may have faced together!—and they
preferred taking their feelings out on others. On strangers,
on the dogs, on Juliana, who had set this wedge between
them.

The month of March was coming to a close and there
was no sign of the heat’s letting up. One Sunday (oh
Sundays people go to bed early), Eduardo, on his way
home from the corner saloon, saw that Cristián was yoking
the oxen. Cristián said to him, “Come on. We have to
leave some hides off at Pardo’s place. I’ve already loaded
them; let’s make the best of the night air.”

Pardo’s warehouse lay, I believe, farther south; they
took the old cattle trail, then turned down a side road. As
night fell, the countryside seemed wider and wider.

They skirted a growth of tall reeds; Cristián threw
down the cigar he had just lit and said evenly, “Let’s get
busy, brother. In a while the buzzards will take over. This
afternoon I killed her. Let her stay here with all her trinkets, she won’t cause us any more harm.”

They threw their arms around each other, on the verge of
tears. One more link bound them now—the woman they had
cruelly sacrificed and their common need to forget her.
The Immortals

With Adolfo Bioy-Casares
(1966)

And see, no longer blinded by our eyes.
Rupert Brooke

Whoever could have foreseen, way back in that innocent
summer of 1923, that the novelette The Chosen One
by
Camilo N. Huergo, presented to me by the author with his
personal inscription on the flyleaf (which I had the decorum to tear out before offering the volume for sale to
successive men of the book trade), hid under the thin
varnish of fiction a prophetic truth. Huergo’s photograph,
in an oval frame, adorns the cover. Each time I look at it, I
have the impression that the snapshot is about to cough, a
victim of that lung disease which nipped in the bud a
promising career. Tuberculosis, in short, denied him the
happiness of acknowledging the letter I wrote him in one of
my characteristic outbursts of generosity.

The epigraph prefixed to this thoughtful essay has been
taken from the aforementioned novelette; I requested Dr.
Montenegro, of the Academy, to render it into Spanish, but
the results were negative. To give the unprepared reader
the gist of the matter, I shall now sketch, in condensed
form, an outline of Huergo’s narrative, as follows:

The storyteller pays a visit, far to the south in Chubut,
to the English rancher don Guillermo Blake, who devotes
his energies not only to the breeding of sheep but also to
the ramblings of the world-famous Plato and to the latest
and more freakish experiments in the field of surgical medicine. On the basis of his reading, don Guillermo concludes
that the five senses obstruct or deform the apprehension of
reality and that, could we free ourselves of them, we would
see the world as it is—endless and timeless. He comes to
think that the eternal models of things lie in the depths of
the soul and that the organs of perception with which the
Creator has endowed us are, grosso modo, hindrances. They
are no better than dark spectacles that blind us to what
exists outside, diverting our attention at the same time from
the splendor we carry within us.

Blake begets a son by one of the farm girls so that the
boy may one day become acquainted with reality. To anesthetize him for life, to make him blind and deaf and dumb,
to emancipate him from the senses of smell and taste, were
the father’s first concerns. He took, in the same way, all
possible measures to make the chosen one unaware of his
own body. As to the rest, this was arranged with contrivances designed to take over respiration, circulation,
nourishment, digestion, and elimination. It was a pity that
the boy, fully liberated, was cut off from all human contact.

Owing to the press of practical matters, the narrator goes
away. After ten years, he returns. Don Guillermo has died;
his son goes on living after his fashion, with natural breathing, heart regular, in a dusty shack cluttered with mechanical devices. The narrator, about to leave for good, drops a
cigarette butt that sets fire to the shack and he never quite
knows whether this act was done on purpose or by pure
chance. So ends Huergo’s story, strange enough for its time
but now, of course, more than outstripped by the rockets
and astronauts of our men of science.

Having dashed off this disinterested compendium of the
tale of a now dead and forgotten author—from whom I have
nothing to gain—I steer back to the heart of the matter.
Memory restores to me a Saturday morning in 1964 when
I had an appointment with the eminent gerontologist Dr.
Raúl Narbondo. The sad truth is that we young bloods of
yesteryear are getting on; the thick mop begins to thin, one
or another ear stops up, the wrinkles collect grime, molars
grow hollow, a cough takes root, the backbone hunches up,
the foot trips on a pebble, and, to put it plainly, the
paterfamilias falters and withers. There was no doubt
about it, the moment had come to see Dr. Narbondo for a
general checkup, particularly considering the fact that he
specialized in the replacement of malfunctioning organs.

Sick at heart because that afternoon the Palermo Juniors
and the Spanish Sports were playing a return match and
maybe I could not occupy my place in the front row to
bolster my team, I betook myself to the clinic on Corrientes
Avenue near Pasteur. The clinic, as its fame betrays, occupies the fifteenth floor of the Adamant Building. I went up
by elevator (manufactured by the Electra Company). Eye
to eye with Narbondo’s brass shingle, I pressed the bell,
and at long last, taking my courage in both hands, I slipped
through the partly open door and entered into the waiting
room proper. There, alone with the latest issues of the
Ladies’ Companion and Jumbo, I whiled away the passing
hours until a cuckoo clock struck twelve and sent me leaping
from my armchair. At once, I asked myself, What happened? Planning my every move now like a sleuth, I took a
step or two toward the next room, peeped in, ready, admittedly, to fly the coop at the slightest sound. From the
streets far below came the noise of horns and traffic, the cry
of a newspaper hawker, the squeal of brakes sparing some
pedestrian, but, all around me, a reign of silence. I crossed
a kind of laboratory, or pharmaceutical back room, furnished with instruments and flasks of all sorts. Stimulated
by the aim of reaching the men’s room, I pushed open a
door at the far end of the lab.

Inside, I saw something that my eyes did not understand. The small enclosure was circular, painted white, with a low
ceiling and neon lighting, and without a single window to
relieve the sense of claustrophobia. The room was inhabited
by four personages, or pieces of furniture. Their color was
the same as the walls, their material wood, their form cubic.
On each cube was another small cube with a latticed opening
and below it a slot as in a mailbox. Carefully scrutinizing the
grilled opening, you noted with alarm that from the interior
you were being watched by something like eyes. The slots
emitted, from time to time, a chorus of sighs or whisperings
that the good Lord himself could not have made head or tail
of. The placement of these cubes was such that they faced
each other in the form of a square, composing a kind of
conclave. I don’t know how many minutes lapsed. At this
point, the doctor came in and said to me, “My pardon,
Bustos, for having kept you waiting. I was just out getting
myself an advance ticket for today’s match between the
Palermo Juniors and the Spanish Sports.” He went on,
indicating the cubes, “Let me introduce you to Santiago
Silberman, to retired clerk-of-court Ludueña, to Aquiles
Molinari, and to Miss Bugard.”

Out of the furniture came faint rumbling sounds. I
quickly reached out a hand and, without the pleasure of
shaking theirs, withdrew in good order, a frozen smile on
my lips. Reaching the vestibule as best I could, I managed
to stammer, “A drink. A stiff drink.”

Narbondo came out of the lab with a graduated beaker
filled with water and dissolved some effervescent drops into
it. Blessed concoction—the wretched taste brought me to my
senses. Then, the door to the small room closed and locked
tight, came the explanation:

‘I’m glad to see, my dear Bustos, that my immortals
have made quite an impact on you. Whoever would have
thought that Homo sapiens, Darwin’s barely human ape,
could achieve such perfection? This, my house, I assure
you, is the only one in all Indo-America where Dr. Eric
Stapledon’s methodology has been fully applied. You recall,
no doubt, the consternation that the death of the late
lamented doctor, which took place in New Zealand, occasioned in scientific circles. I flatter myself, furthermore, for
having implemented his precursory labors with a few Argentinean touches. In itself, the thesis—Newton’s apple all
over again—is fairly simple. The death of the body is a
result, always, of the failure of some organ or other, call it
the kidney, lungs, heart, or what you like. With the replacement of the organism’s various components, in themselves
perishable, with other corresponding stainless or polyethylene parts, there is no earthly reason whatever why the
soul, why you yourself—Bustos Domecq—should not be immortal. None of your philosophical niceties here; the body
can be vulcanized and from time to time recaulked, and so
the mind keeps going. Surgery brings immortality to mankind. Life’s essential aim has been attained—the mind lives
on without fear of cessation. Each of our immortals is
comforted by the certainty, backed by our firm’s guarantee,
of being a witness in aeternum. The brain, refreshed night
and day by a system of electrical charges, is the last
organic bulwark in which ball bearings and cells collaborate. The rest is Formica, steel, plastics. Respiration, alimentation, generation, mobility—elimination itself!—belong
to the past. Our immortal is real estate. One or two minor
touches are still missing, it’s true. Oral articulation, dialogue, may still be improved. As for the cost, you need not
worry yourself. By means of a procedure that circumvents
legal red tape, the candidate transfers his property to us,
and the Narbondo Company, Inc.—I, my son, his descendants—guarantees your upkeep, in statu quo, to the end of
time. And, I might add, a money-back guarantee.”

It was then that he laid a friendly hand on my shoulder.
I felt his will taking power over me. “Ha-ha! I see I’ve
whetted your appetite, I’ve tempted you, dear Bustos.
You’ll need a couple of months or so to get your affairs in
order and to have your stock portfolio signed over to us. As
far as the operation goes, naturally, as a friend, I want to
save you a little something. Instead of our usual fee of ten
thousand dollars, for you, ninety-five hundred—in cash, of
course. The rest is yours. It goes to pay your lodging, care,
and service. The medical procedure in itself is painless. No
more than a question of amputation and replacement.
Nothing to worry about. On the eve, just keep yourself
calm, untroubled. Avoid heavy meals, tobacco, and alcohol,
apart from your accustomed and imported, I hope, Scotch
or two. Above all, refrain from impatience.”

“Why two months?” I asked him. “One’s enough, and
then some. I come out of the anesthesia and I’m one more
of your cubes. You have my address and phone number.
We’ll keep in touch. I’ll be back next Friday at the latest.”

At the escape hatch he handed me the card of Nemirovski, Nemirovski, & Nemirovski, Counsellors at Law, who
would put themselves at my disposal for all the details of
drawing up the will. With perfect composure I walked to
the subway entrance, then took the stairs at a run. I lost no
time. That same night, without leaving the slightest trace
behind, I moved to the New Impartial, in whose register I
figure under the assumed name of Aquiles Silberman. Here,
in my bedroom at the far rear of this modest hotel, wearing
a false beard and dark spectacles, I am setting down this
account of the facts.
The Meeting

To Susana Bombal
(1969)

Anyone leafing his way through the morning paper does so
either to escape his surroundings or to provide himself with
small talk for later in the day, so it is not to be wondered
at that no one any longer remembers—or else remembers as
in a dream—the famous and once widely discussed case of
Maneco Uriarte and of Duncan. The event took place,
furthermore, back around 1910, the year of the comet and
the Centennial, and since then we have had and have lost
so many things. Both protagonists are now dead; those who
witnessed the episode solemnly swore silence. I, too, raised
my hand for the oath, feeling the importance of the ritual
with all the romantic seriousness of my nine or ten years. I
do not know whether the others noticed that I had given my
word; I do not know whether they kept theirs. Anyway,
here is the story, with all the inevitable variations brought
about by time and by good or bad writing.

My cousin Lafinur took me to a barbecue that evening at
a country house called The Laurels, which  belonged to some
friends of his. I cannot fix its exact location; let us take
any of those suburban towns lying just to the north, shaded
and quiet, that slope down to the river and that have
nothing in common with sprawling Buenos Aires and its
surrounding prairie. The journey by train lasted long
enough to seem endless to me, but time for children—as is
well known—flows slowly. It was already dark when we
passed through the villa’s main gate. Here, I felt, were all
the ancient, elemental things: the smell of meat cooking
golden brown, the trees, the dogs, the kindling wood, and
the fire that brings men together.

The guests numbered about a dozen; all were grown-ups.
The eldest, I learned later, was not yet thirty. They were
also—this I was soon to find out—well versed in matters
about which I am still somewhat backward: race horses, the
right tailors, motorcars, and notoriously expensive women.
No one ruffled my shyness, no one paid any attention to me.
The lamb, slowly and skillfully prepared by one of the
hired men, kept us a long time in the big dining room. The
dates of vintages were argued back and forth. There was a
guitar; my cousin, if I remember correctly, sang a couple of
Elías Regules’ ballads about gauchos in the back country
of Uruguay and some verses in dialect, in the incipient
lunfardo
of those days, about a knife fight in a brothel on
Junín Street. Coffee and Havana cigars were brought in.
Not a word about getting back. I felt (in the words of the
poet Lugones) the fear of what is suddenly too late. I dared
not look at the clock. In order to disguise my boyish
loneliness among grown-ups, I put away—not really liking
it—a glass or two of wine. Uriarte, in a loud voice, proposed
to Duncan a two-handed game of poker. Someone objected
that that kind of play made for a poor game and suggested
a hand of four. Duncan agreed, but Uriarte, with a stubbornness that I did not understand and that I did not try
to understand, insisted on the first scheme. Outside of
truco—a game whose real aim is to pass time with mischief
and verses—and of the modest mazes of solitaire, I never
enjoyed cards. I slipped away without anyone’s noticing. A
rambling old house, unfamiliar and dark (only in the dining room was there light), means more to a boy than a new
country means to a traveler. Step by step, I explored the
rooms; I recall a billiard room, a long gallery with rectangular and diamond-shaped panes, a couple of rocking
chairs, and a window from which you could just make out a
summerhouse. In the darkness I lost my way; the owner of
the house, whose name, as I recall after all these years, may
have been Acevedo or Acebal, finally came across me somehow. Out of kindness or perhaps out of a collector’s vanity,
he led me to a display cabinet. On lighting a lamp, I saw
the glint of steel. It was a collection of knives that had once
been in the hands of famous fighters. He told me that he
had a bit of land somewhere to the north around Pergamino, and that he had been picking up these things on his
travels back and forth across the province. He opened the
cabinet and, without looking at what was written on the
tags, he began giving me accounts of each item; they were
more or less the same except for dates and place names. I
asked him whether among the weapons he might have the
dagger of Juan Moreira, who was in that day the archetype
of the gaucho, as later Martín Fierro and Don Segundo
Sombra would be. He had to confess that he hadn’t but
that he could show me one like it, with a U-shaped crosspiece in the hilt. He was interrupted by the sound of
angry voices. At once he shut the cabinet and turned to
leave; I followed him.

Uriarte was shouting that his opponent had tried to cheat
him. All the others stood around the two players. Duncan, I
remember, was a taller man than the rest of the company,
and was well built, though somewhat round-shouldered; his
face was expressionless, and his hair was so light it was
almost white. Maneco Uriarte was nervous, dark, with perhaps a touch of Indian blood, and wore a skimpy, petulant
moustache. It was obvious that everybody was drunk; I do
not know whether there were two or three emptied bottles
on the floor or whether an excess of movies suggests this
false memory to me. Uriarte’s insults did not let up; at first
sharp, they now grew obscene. Duncan appeared not to
hear, but finally, as though weary, he got up and threw a
punch. From the floor, Uriarte snarled that he was not
going to take this outrage, and he challenged Duncan to
fight.

Duncan said no, and added, as though to explain, “The
trouble is I’m afraid of you.”

Everybody howled with laughter.
Uriarte, picking himself up, answered, “I’m going to have
it out with you, and right now.”
Someone—may he be forgiven for it—remarked that
weapons were not lacking.
I do not know who went and opened the glass cabinet.
Maneco Uriarte picked out the showiest and longest dagger, the one with the U-shaped crosspiece; Duncan, almost
absentmindedly, picked a wooden-handled knife with the
stamp of a tiny tree on the blade. Someone else said it was
just like Maneco to play it safe, to choose a sword. It
astonished no one that his hand began shaking; what was
astonishing is that the same thing happened with Duncan.

Tradition demands that men about to fight should respect the house in which they are guests, and step outside.
Half on a spree, half seriously, we all went out into the
damp night. I was not drunk—at least, not on wine—but I
was reeling with adventure; I wished very hard that someone would be killed, so that later I could tell about it and
always remember it. Maybe at that moment the others were
no more adult than I was, I also had the feeling that an
overpowering current was dragging us on and would drown
us. Nobody believed the least bit in Maneco’s accusation;
everyone saw it as the fruit of an old rivalry, exacerbated
by the wine.

We pushed our way through a clump of trees, leaving
behind the summerhouse. Uriarte and Duncan led the way,
wary of each other. The rest of us strung ourselves out
around the edge of an opening of lawn. Duncan had
stopped there in the moonlight and said, with mild authority, “This looks like the right place.”
The two men stood in the center, not quite knowing what
to do. A voice rang out: “Let go of all that hardware and use
your hands!”

But the men were already fighting. They began clumsily,
almost as if they were afraid of hurting each other; they
began by watching the blades, but later their eyes were on
one another. Uriarte had laid aside his anger, Duncan his
contempt or aloofness. Danger, in some way, had transfigured them; these were now two men fighting, not boys. I
had imagined the fight as a chaos of steel; instead, I was
able to follow it, or almost follow it, as though it were a
game of chess. The intervening years may, of course, have
exaggerated or blurred what I saw. I do not know how long
it lasted; there are events that fall outside the common
measure of time.

Without ponchos to act as shields, they used their
forearms to block each lunge of the knife. Their sleeves,
soon hanging in shreds, grew black with blood. I thought
that we had gone wrong in supposing that they knew
nothing about this kind of fencing. I noticed right off that
they handled themselves in different ways. Their weapons
were unequal. Duncan, in order to make up for his disadvantage, tried to stay in close to the other man; Uriarte
kept stepping back to be able to lunge out with long, low
thrusts. The same voice that had called attention to the
display cabinet shouted out now: “They’re killing each
other! Stop them!”

But no one dared break it up. Uriarte had lost ground;
Duncan charged him. They were almost body to body now.
Uriarte’s
weapon sought Duncan’s face. Suddenly the blade
seemed shorter, for it was piercing the taller man’s chest.
Duncan lay stretched out on the grass. It was at this point
that he said, his voice very low, “How strange. All this is
like a dream.”

He did not shut his eyes, he did not move, and I had
seen a man kill another man.

Maneco Uriarte bent over the body, sobbing openly, and
begged to be forgiven. The thing he had just done was
beyond him. I know now that he regretted less having
committed a crime than having carried out a senseless act.

I did not want to look anymore. What I had wished for
so much had happened, and it left me shaken. Lafinur told
me later that they had had to struggle hard to pull out the
weapon. A makeshift council was formed. They decided to
lie as little as possible and to elevate this duel with knives
to a duel with swords. Four of them volunteered as seconds,
among them Acebal. In Buenos Aires anything can be
fixed; someone always has a friend.

On top of the mahogany table where the men had been
playing, a pack of English cards and a pile of bills lay in a
jumble that nobody wanted to look at or to touch.

In the years that followed, I often considered revealing
the story to some friend, but always I felt that there was a
greater pleasure in being the keeper of a secret than in
telling it. However, around 1929, a chance conversation
suddenly moved me one day to break my long silence. The
retired police captain, don José Olave, was recalling stories
about men from the tough riverside neighborhood of the
Retiro who had been handy with their knives; he remarked
that when they were out to kill their man, scum of this
kind had no use for the rules of the game, and that before
all the fancy playing with daggers that you saw now on the
stage, knife fights were few and far between. I said I had
witnessed one, and gave him an account of what had happened nearly twenty years earlier.

He listened to me with professional attention, then said,
“Are you sure Uriarte and What’s-His-Name never handled
a knife before? Maybe they had picked up a thing or two
around their fathers’ ranches.”

“I don’t think so,” I said. “Everybody there that night
knew one another pretty well, and I can tell you they were
all amazed at the way the two men fought.”

Olave went on in his quiet manner, as if thinking aloud,
“One of the weapons had a U-shaped crosspiece in the
handle. There were two daggers of that kind which became
quite famous—Moreira’s and Juan Almada’s. Almada was
from down south, in Tapalquén.”

Something seemed to come awake in my memory. Olave
continued. “You also mentioned a knife with a wooden
handle, one with the Little Tree brand. There are thousands
of them, but there was one—”

He broke off for a moment, then said, “Señor Acevedo
had a big property up around Pergamino. There was another of these famous tough, from up that way—Juan Almanza
was his name. This was along about the turn of the century. When he was fourteen, he killed his first man with one
of these knives. From then on, for luck, he stuck to the
same one. Juan Almanza and Juan Almada had it in for
each other, jealous of the fact that many people confused
the two. For a long time they searched high and low for one
another, but they never met. Juan Almanza was killed by a
stray bullet during some election brawl or other. The other
man, I think, died a natural death in a hospital bed in Las
Flores.”

Nothing more was said. Each of us was left with his own
conclusions.

Nine or ten men, none of whom is any longer living, saw
what my eyes saw—that sudden stab and the body under the
night sky—but perhaps what we were really seeing was the
end of another story, an older story. I began to wonder
whether it was Maneco Uriarte who killed Duncan or
whether in some uncanny way it could have been the
weapons, not the men, which fought. I still remember how
Uriarte’s hand shook when he first gripped his knife, and
the same with Duncan, as though the knives were coming
awake after a long sleep side by side in the cabinet. Even
after their gauchos were dust, the knives—the knives, not
their tools, the men—knew how to fight. And that night they
fought well.

Things last longer than people; who knows whether these
knives will meet again, who knows whether the story ends
here.
Pedro Salvadores

To Juan Murchison
(1969)

I want to leave a written record (perhaps the first to be
attempted) of one of the strangest and grimmest happenings in Argentine history. To meddle as little as possible in
the telling, to abstain from picturesque details or personal
conjectures is, it seems to me, the only way to do this.

A man, a woman, and the overpowering shadow of a
dictator are the three characters. The man’s name was
Pedro Salvadores; my grandfather Acevedo saw him days
or weeks after the dictator’s downfall in the battle of
Caseros. Pedro Salvadores may have been no different from
anyone else, but the years and his fate set him apart. He
was a gentleman like many other gentlemen of his day. He
owned (let us suppose) a ranch in the country and, opposed to the tyranny, was on the Unitarian side. His wife’s
family name was Planes; they lived together on Suipacha
Street near the corner of Temple in what is now the heart
of Buenos Aires. The house in which the event took place
was much like any other, with its street door, long arched
entranceway, inner grillwork gate, its rooms, its row of two
or three patios. The dictator, of course, was Rosas.

One night, around 1842, Salvadores and his wife heard
the growing, muffled sound of horses’ hooves out on the
unpaved street and the riders shouting their drunken vivas
and their threats. This time Rosas’ henchmen did not ride
on. After the shouts came repeated knocks at the door;
while the men began forcing it, Salvadores was able to pull
the dining-room table aside, lift the rug, and hide himself
down in the cellar. His wife dragged the table back in
place. The mazorca
broke into the house; they had come to
take Salvadores. The woman said her husband had run
away to Montevideo. The men did not believe her; they
flogged her, they smashed all the blue chinaware (blue was
the Unitarian color), they searched the whole house, but
they never thought of lifting the rug. At midnight they rode
away, swearing that they would soon be back.

Here is the true beginning of Pedro Salvadores’ story. He
lived nine years in the cellar. For all we may tell ourselves
that years are made of days and days of hours and that nine
years is an abstract term and an impossible sum, the story
is nonetheless gruesome. I suppose that in the darkness,
which his eyes somehow learned to decipher, he had no
particular thoughts, not even of his hatred or his danger.
He was simply there—in the cellar—with echoes of the world
he was cut off from sometimes reaching him from overhead:
his wife’s footsteps, the bucket clanging against the lip of
the well, a heavy rainfall in the patio. Every day of his
imprisonment, for all he knew, could have been the last.

His wife let go all the servants, who could possibly have
informed against them, and told her family that Salvadores
was in Uruguay. Meanwhile, she earned a living for them
both sewing uniforms for the army. In the course of time,
she gave birth to two children; her family turned from her,
thinking she had a lover. After the tyrant’s fall, they gotdown on their knees and begged to be forgiven.

What was Pedro Salvadores? Who was he? Was it his
fear, his love, the unseen presence of Buenos Aires, or—in
the long run—habit that held him prisoner? In order to keep
him with her, his wife would make up news to tell him
about whispered plots and rumored victories. Maybe he was
a coward and she loyally hid it from him that she knew. I
picture him in his cellar perhaps without a candle, without
a book. Darkness probably sank him into sleep. His dreams,
at the outset, were probably of that sudden night when the
blade sought his throat, of the streets he knew so well, of
the open plains. As the years went on, he would have been
unable to escape even in his sleep; whatever he dreamed
would have taken place in the cellar. At first, he may have
been a man hunted down, a man in danger of his life; later
(we will never know for certain), an animal at peace in its
burrow or a sort of dim god.

All this went on until that summer day of 1852 when
Rosas fled the country. It was only then that the secret
man came out into the light of day; my grandfather spoke
with him. Flabby, overweight, Salvadores was the color of
wax and could not speak above a low voice. He never gotback his confiscated lands; I think he died in poverty.

As with so many things, the fate of Pedro Salvadores
strikes us as a symbol of something we are about to understand, but never quite do.
Rosendo’s Tale

(1969)

It was about eleven o’clock at night; I had entered the old
grocery store-bar (which today is just a plain bar) at the
corner of Bolívar and Venezuela. From off on one side a
man signaled me with a “psst.” There must have been
something forceful in his manner because I heeded him at
once. He was seated at one of the small tables in front of
an empty glass, and I somehow felt he had been sitting
there for a long time. Neither short nor tall, he had the
appearance of a common working man or maybe an old
farmhand. His thin moustache was graying. Fearful of his
health, like most people in Buenos Aires, he had not taken
off the scarf that draped his shoulders. He asked me to have
a drink with him. I sat down and we chatted. All this took
place sometime back in the early thirties. This is what the
man told me.

You don’t know me except maybe by reputation, but I
know
who
you
are.
I’m
Rosendo
Juárez.
The
late Paredes must have told you about me. The old man could pull the
wool over people’s eyes and liked to stretch a point—not to
cheat anybody, mind you, but just in fun. Well, seeing you
and I have nothing better to do, I’m going to tell you
exactly what happened that night. The night the Butcher
got killed. You put all that down in a storybook, which I’m
not equipped to pass judgment on, but I want you to know
the truth about all that trumped-up stuff.

Things happen to you and it’s only years later you begin
understanding them. What happened to me that night really had its start a long time back. I grew up in the neighborhood of the Maldonado, way out past Floresta. The Maldonado was just a ditch then, a kind of sewer, and it’s a good
thing they’ve covered it over now. I’ve always been of the
opinion that the march of progress can’t be held back—not
by anybody. Anyway, a man’s born where he’s born. It
never entered my head to find out who my father was.
Clementina Juárez—that was my mother—was a decent
woman who earned a living doing laundry. As far as I
know, she was from Entre Ríos or Uruguay; anyhow, she
always talked about her relatives from Concepción del
Uruguay. I grew up like a weed. I first learned to handle a
knife the way everyone else did, fencing with a charred
stick. If you jabbed your man, it left a mark. Soccer hadn’t
taken us over yet—it was still in the hands of the English.

One night at the corner bar a young guy named Garmendia began taunting me, trying to pick a fight. I played deaf,
but this other guy, who’d had a few, kept it up. We stepped
out. Then from the sidewalk he swung open the door and
said back inside to the people, “Don’t anybody worry, I’ll
be right back.”

I somehow got hold of a knife. We went off toward the
brook, slow, our eyes on each other, He had a few years on
me. We’d played at that fencing game a number of times
together, and I had the feeling he was going to cut me up
in ribbons. I went down the right-hand side of the road and
he went down the left. He stumbled on some dry clods of
mud. That moment was all I needed. I got the jump on
him, almost without thinking, and opened a slice in his
face. We got locked in a clinch, there was a minute when
anything might have happened, and in the end I got my
knife in and it was all over. Only later on did I find out I’d
been cut up, too. But only a few scratches. That night I saw
how easy it was to kill a man or to get killed. The water in
the brook was pretty low; stalling for time, I half hid him
behind one of the brick kilns. Fool that I was, I went and
slipped off that fancy ring of his that he always wore with
the nice stone in it. I put it on, I straightened my hat, and
I went back to the bar. I walked in nonchalant, saying to
them, “Looks like the one who came back was me.”

I asked for a shot of rum and, to tell the truth, I needed
it bad. It was then somebody noticed the blood on mysleeve.

I spent that whole night tossing and turning on my cot,
and it was almost light outside before I dropped off and
slept. Late the next day two cops came looking for me. My
mother (may she rest in peace) began shrieking. They
herded me along just like I was some kind of criminal. Two
nights and two days I had to wait there in the cooler.
Nobody came to see me, either, outside of Luis Irala—a real
friend—only they wouldn’t let him in. Then the third morning the police captain sent for me. He sat there in his chair,
not even looking at me, and said, “So you’re the one who
took care of Garmendia, are you?”

“If that’s what you say,” I answered.

“You call me sir. And don’t get funny or try beating
around the bush. Here are the sworn statements of witnesses and the ring that was found in your house. Just sign
this confession and get it over with.”

He dipped the pen in the inkwell and handed it to me.
“Let me do some thinking, Captain sir,” I came out with.
“I’ll give you twenty-four hours where you can do some
hard thinking—in the cooler. I’m not going to rush you. If
you don’t care to see reason, you can get used to the idea of
a little vacation up on Las Heras—the penitentiary.”

As you can probably imagine, I didn’t understand.
“Look,” he said, “if you come around, all you’ll get is a
few days. Then I’ll let you go, and don Nicolás Paredes
has already given me his word he’ll straighten things out for
you.”

Actually, it was ten days. Then at last they remembered
me. I signed what they wanted, and one of the two cops
took me around to Paredes’ house on Cabrera Street.

Horses were tied to the hitching post, and in the entranceway and inside the place there were more people than
around a whorehouse. It looked to me like the party headquarters. Don Nicolás, who was sipping his maté, finally
got around to me. Taking his good time, he told me he was
sending me out to Morón, where they were getting ready
for the elections. He was putting me in touch with Mr.
Laferrer, who would try me out. He had the letter written by
some kid all dressed in black, who, from what I heard,
made up poems about tenements and filth—stuff that no
refined public would dream of reading. I thanked Paredes
for the favor and left. When I got to the corner, the cop
wasn’t tailing me any more.

Providence knows what it’s up to; everything had turned
out for the best. Garmendia’s death, which at first had
caused me a lot of worry, now opened things up for me. Of
course, the law had me in the palm of their hands. If I was
no use to the party they’d clap me back inside, but I felt
pretty good and was counting on myself.

Mr. Laferrer warned me I was going to have to walk the
straight and narrow with him, and said if I did I might
even become his bodyguard. I came through with what was
expected of me. In Morón, and later on in my part of
town, I earned the trust of my bosses. The cops and the
party kept on building up my reputation as a tough guy. I
turned out to be pretty good at organizing the vote around
the polls here in the capital and out in the province. I
won’t take up your time going into details about brawls and
bloodletting, but let me tell you, in those days elections
were lively affairs. I could never stand the Radicals, who
down to this day are still hanging onto the beard of their
chief Alem. There wasn’t a soul around who didn’t hold me
in respect. I got hold of a woman, La Lujanera, and a finelooking sorrel. For years I tried to live up to the part of the
outlaw Moreira, who, in his time—the way I figure it—was
probably trying to play the part of some other gaucho
outlaw. I took to cards and absinthe.

An old man has a way of rambling on and on, but now
I’m coming to the part I want you to hear. I wonder if I’ve
already mentioned Luis Irala. The kind of friend you don’t
find every day. Irala was a man already well along in years.
He never was afraid of work, and he took a liking to me. In
his whole life he never had anything to do with politics. He
was a carpenter by trade. He never caused anyone trouble
and never allowed anyone to cause him trouble. One morning he came to see me and he said, “Of course, you’ve
heard by now that Casilda’s left me. Rufino Aguilera took
her away from me.”

I’d known that customer around Morón. I answered,
“Yes, I know all about him. Of all the Aguileras, he’s the
least rotten.”

“Rotten or not, now he’ll have to reckon with me.”

I thought that over for a while and told him, “Nobody
takes anything away from anybody. If Casilda left you, it’s
because she cares for Rufino and you mean nothing to her.”
“And what are people going to say? That I’m a coward?”

“My advice is don’t get yourself mixed up in gossip
about what people might say or about a woman who has no
use for you.”

“It’s not her I’m worried about. A man who thinks five
minutes straight about a woman is no man, he’s a queer.
Casilda has no heart. The last night we spent together she
told me I wasn’t as young as I used to be.”

“Maybe she was telling you the truth.”

“That’s what hurts. What matters to me now is Rufino.”
“Be careful there. I’ve seen Rufino in action around the
polls in Merlo. He’s a flash with a knife.”

“You think I’m afraid of him?”
“I know you’re not afraid of him, but think it over. One
of two things—if you kill him, you get put away; if he kills
you, you go six feet under.”

“Maybe so. What would you do in my shoes?”

“I don’t know, but my own life isn’t exactly a model. I’m
only a guy who became a party strong-arm man trying to
cheat a jail sentence.”

“I’m not going to the strong-arm guy for any party, I’m
only out to settle a debt.”
“So you’re going to risk your peace and quiet for a man
you don’t know and a woman you don’t love any more?”

He wouldn’t hear me out. He just left. The next day the
news came that he challenged Rufino in a saloon in Morón,
and Rufino killed him. He was out to kill, and he got
killed—but a fair fight, man to man. I’d given him my
honest advice as a friend, but somehow I felt guilty just the
same.

A few days after the wake, I went to a cockfight. I’d
never been very big on cockfights, and that Sunday, to tell
the truth, I had all I could do to stomach the thing. What
is it in these animals, I kept thinking, that makes them
gouge each other’s eyes like that?

The night of my story, the night of the end of my story,
I had told the boys I’d show up at Blackie’s for the dance.
So many years ago now, and that dress with the flowers my
woman was wearing still comes back to me. The party was
out in the backyard. Of course, there was the usual drunk
or two trying to raise hell, but I took good care to see that
things went off the way they ought to. It wasn’t twelve yet
when these strangers put in an appearance. One of them—
the one they called the Butcher and who got himself
stabbed in the back that same night—stood us all to a round
of drinks. The odd thing was that the two of us looked a lot
alike. Something was in the air; he drew up to me and
began praising me up and down. He said he was from the
Northside, where he’d heard a thing or two about me. I let
him go on, but I was already sizing him up. He wasn’t
letting the gin alone, either, maybe to work up his courage,
and finally he came out and asked me to fight. Then
something happened that nobody ever understood. In that
big loudmouth I saw myself, the same as in a mirror, and it
made me feel ashamed. I wasn’t scared; maybe if I’d been
scared I’d have fought with him. I just stood there as if
nothing happened. This other guy, with his face just inches
away from mine, began shouting so everyone could hear,
“The trouble is you’re nothing but a coward.”

“Maybe so,” I said. “I’m not afraid of being taken for a
coward. If it makes you feel good, why don’t you say
you’ve called me a son of a bitch, too, and that I’ve let you
spit all over me. Now—are you any happier?”

La Lujanera took out the knife I always carried in my vest
lining and, burning up inside, she shoved it into my hand.
To clinch it, she said, “Rosendo, I think you’re going to
need this.”

I let it drop and walked out, but not hurrying. The boys
made way for me. They were stunned. What did it matter
to me what they thought.

To make a clean break with that life, I took off for
Uruguay, where I found myself work as a teamster. Since
coming back to Buenos Aires I’ve settled around here. San
Telmo always was a respectable neighborhood.


Chapter 1

MANY YEARS LATER as he faced the firing squad, Colonel Aureliano Buendía was to remember that
distant afternoon when his father took him to discover ice. At that time Macondo was a village of
twenty adobe houses, built on the bank of a river of clear water that ran along a bed of polished
stones, which were white and enormous, like prehistoric eggs. The world was so recent that many
things lacked names, and in order to indicate them it was necessary to point. Every year during the
month of March a family of ragged gypsies would set up their tents near the village, and with a great
uproar of pipes and kettledrums they would display new inventions. First they brought the magnet.
A heavy gypsy with an untamed beard and sparrow hands, who introduced himself as Melquíades,
put on a bold public demonstration of what he himself called the eighth wonder of the learned al-
chemists of Macedonia. He went from house to house dragging two metal ingots and everybody was
amazed to see pots, pans, tongs, and braziers tumble down from their places and beams creak from
the desperation of nails and screws trying to emerge, and even objects that had been lost for a long
time appeared from where they had been searched for most and went dragging along in turbulent
confusion behind Melquíades’ magical irons. “Things have a life of their own,” the gypsy proclaimed
with a harsh accent. “It’s simply a matter of waking up their souls.” José Arcadio Buendía, whose
unbridled imagination always went beyond the genius of nature and even beyond miracles and
magic, thought that it would be possible to make use of that useless invention to extract gold from
the bowels of the earth. Melquíades, who was an honest man, warned him: “It won’t work for
that.” But José Arcadio Buendía at that time did not believe in the honesty of gypsies, so he traded
his mule and a pair of goats for the two magnetized ingots. Úrsula Iguarán, his wife, who relied on
those animals to increase their poor domestic holdings, was unable to dissuade him. “Very soon well
have gold enough and more to pave the floors of the house,” her husband replied. For several
months he worked hard to demonstrate the truth of his idea. He explored every inch of the region,
even the riverbed, dragging the two iron ingots along and reciting Melquíades’ incantation aloud.
The only thing he succeeded in doing was to unearth a suit of fifteenth-century armor which had all
of its pieces soldered together with rust and inside of which there was the hollow resonance of an
enormous stone-filled gourd. When José Arcadio Buendía and the four men of his expedition
managed to take the armor apart, they found inside a calcified skeleton with a copper locket
containing a woman’s hair around its neck.

In March the gypsies returned. This time they brought a telescope and a magnifying glass the size
of a drum, which they exhibited as the latest discovery of the Jews of Amsterdam. They placed a
gypsy woman at one end of the village and set up the telescope at the entrance to the tent. For the
price of five reales, people could look into the telescope and see the gypsy woman an arm’s length
away. “Science has eliminated distance,” Melquíades proclaimed. “In a short time, man will be able
to see what is happening in any place in the world without leaving his own house.” A burning
noonday sun brought out a startling demonstration with the gigantic magnifying glass: they put a pile
of dry hay in the middle of the street and set it on fire by concentrating the sun’s rays. José Arcadio
Buendía, who had still not been consoled for the failure of big magnets, conceived the idea of using
that invention as a weapon of war. Again Melquíades tried to dissuade him, but he finally accepted
the two magnetized ingots and three colonial coins in exchange for the magnifying glass. Úrsula
wept in consternation. That money was from a chest of gold coins that her father had put together
ova an entire life of privation and that she had buried underneath her bed in hopes of a proper
occasion to make use of it. José Arcadio Buendía made no at. tempt to console her, completely


absorbed in his tactical experiments with the abnegation of a scientist and even at the risk of his own
life. In an attempt to show the effects of the glass on enemy troops, he exposed himself to the
concentration of the sun’s rays and suffered burns which turned into sores that took a long time to
heal. Over the protests of his wife, who was alarmed at such a dangerous invention, at one point he
was ready to set the house on fire. He would spend hours on end in his room, calculating the
strategic possibilities of his novel weapon until he succeeded in putting together a manual of
startling instructional clarity and an irresistible power of conviction. He sent it to the government,
accompanied by numerous descriptions of his experiments and several pages of explanatory
sketches; by a messenger who crossed the mountains, got lost in measureless swamps, forded stormy
rivers, and was on the point of perishing under the lash of despair, plague, and wild beasts until he
found a route that joined the one used by the mules that carried the mail. In spite of the fact that a
trip to the capital was little less than impossible at that time, José Arcadio Buendía promised to
undertake it as soon as the government ordered him to so that he could put on some practical
demonstrations of his invention for the military authorities and could train them himself in the
complicated art of solar war. For several years he waited for an answer. Finally, tired of waiting, he
bemoaned to Melquíades the failure of his project and the gypsy then gave him a convincing proof
of his honesty: he gave him back the doubloons in exchange for the magnifying glass, and he left
him in addition some Portuguese maps and several instruments of navigation. In his own
handwriting he set down a concise synthesis of the studies by Monk Hermann. which he left José
Arcadio so that he would be able to make use of the astrolabe, the compass, and the sextant. José
Arcadio Buendía spent the long months of the rainy season shut up in a small room that he had built
in the rear of the house so that no one would disturb his experiments. Having completely aban-
doned his domestic obligations, he spent entire nights in the courtyard watching the course of the
stars and he almost contracted sunstroke from trying to establish an exact method to ascertain noon.
When he became an expert in the use and manipulation of his instruments, he conceived a notion of
space that allowed him to navigate across unknown seas, to visit uninhabited territories, and to
establish relations with splendid beings without having to leave his study. That was the period in
which he acquired the habit of talking to himself, of walking through the house without paying
attention to anyone, as Úrsula and the children broke their backs in the garden, growing banana and
caladium, cassava and yams, ahuyama roots and eggplants. Suddenly, without warning, his feverish
activity was interrupted and was replaced by a kind of fascination. He spent several days as if he
were bewitched, softly repeating to himself a string of fearful conjectures without giving credit to his
own understanding. Finally, one Tuesday in December, at lunchtime, all at once he released the
whole weight of his torment. The children would remember for the rest of their lives the august
solemnity with which their father, devastated by his prolonged vigil and by the wrath of his
imagination, revealed his discovery to them:

“The earth is round, like an orange.”

Úrsula lost her patience. “If you have to go crazy, please go crazy all by yourself!” she shouted.
“But don’t try to put your gypsy ideas into the heads of the children.” José Arcadio Buendía,
impassive, did not let himself be frightened by the desperation of his wife, who, in a seizure of rage,
mashed the astrolabe against the floor. He built another one, he gathered the men of the village in
his little room, and he demonstrated to them, with theories that none of them could understand, the
possibility of returning to where one had set out by consistently sailing east. The whole village was
convinced that José Arcadio Buendía had lost his reason, when Melquíades returned to set things
straight. He gave public praise to the intelligence of a man who from pure astronomical speculation
had evolved a theory that had already been proved in practice, although unknown in Macondo until
then, and as a proof of his admiration he made him a gift that was to have a profound influence on
the future of the village: the laboratory of an alchemist.


By then Melquíades had aged with surprising rapidity. On his first trips he seemed to be the same
age as José Arcadio Buendía. But while the latter had preserved his extraordinary strength, which
permitted him to pull down a horse by grabbing its ears, the gypsy seemed to have been worn dowse
by some tenacious illness. It was, in reality, the result of multiple and rare diseases contracted on his
innumerable trips around the world. According to what he himself said as he spoke to José Arcadio
Buendía while helping him set up the laboratory, death followed him everywhere, sniffing at the
cuffs of his pants, but never deciding to give him the final clutch of its claws. He was a fugitive from
all the plagues and catastrophes that had ever lashed mankind. He had survived pellagra in Persia,
scurvy in the Malayan archipelago, leprosy in Alexandria, beriberi in Japan, bubonic plague in
Madagascar, an earthquake in Sicily, and a disastrous shipwreck in the Strait of Magellan. That
prodigious creature, said to possess the keys of Nostradamus, was a gloomy man, enveloped in a sad
aura, with an Asiatic look that seemed to know what there was on the other side of things. He wore
a large black hat that looked like a raven with widespread wings, and a velvet vest across which the
patina of the centuries had skated. But in spite of his immense wisdom and his mysterious breadth,
he had a human burden, an earthly condition that kept him involved in the small problems of daily
life. He would complain of the ailments of old age, he suffered from the most insignificant
economic difficulties, and he had stopped laughing a long time back because scurvy had made his
teeth drop out. On that suffocating noontime when the gypsy revealed his secrets, José Arcadio
Buendía had the certainty that it was the beginning of a great friendship. The children were startled
by his fantastic stories. Aureliano, who could not have been more than five at the time, would
remember him for the rest of his life as he saw him that afternoon, sitting against the metallic and
quivering light from the window, lighting up with his deep organ voice the darkest reaches of the
imagination, while down over his temples there flowed the grease that was being melted by the heat.
José Arcadio, his older brother, would pass on that wonderful image as a hereditary memory to all of
his descendants. Úrsula on the other hand, held a bad memory of that visit, for she had entered the
room just as Melquíades had carelessly broken a flask of bichloride of mercury.

“It’s the smell of the devil,” she said.

“Not at all,” Melquíades corrected her. “It has been proven that the devil has sulphuric properties
and this is just a little corrosive sublimate.”

Always didactic, he went into a learned exposition of the diabolical properties of cinnabar, but
Úrsula paid no attention to him, although she took the children off to pray. That biting odor would
stay forever in her mind linked to the memory of Melquíades.

The rudimentary laboratory—in addition to a profusion of pots, funnels, retorts, filters, and
sieves—was made up of a primitive water pipe, a glass beaker with a long, thin neck, a reproduction
of the philosopher’s egg, and a still the gypsies themselves had built in accordance with modern
descriptions of the three-armed alembic of Mary the Jew. Along with those items, Melquíades left
samples of the seven metals that corresponded to the seven planets, the formulas of Moses and
Zosimus for doubling the quantity of gold, and a set of notes and sketches concerning the processes
of the Great Teaching that would permit those who could interpret them to undertake the
manufacture of the philosopher’s stone. Seduced by the simplicity of the formulas to double the
quantity of gold, José Arcadio Buendía paid court to Úrsula for several weeks so that she would let
him dig up her colonial coins and increase them by as many times as it was possible to subdivide
mercury. Úrsula gave in, as always, to her husband’s unyielding obstinacy. Then José Arcadio
Buendía threw three doubloons into a pan and fused them with copper filings, orpiment, brimstone,
and lead. He put it all to boil in a pot of castor oil until he got a thick and pestilential syrup which
was more like common caramel than valuable gold. In risky and desperate processes of distillation,
melted with the seven planetary metals, mixed with hermetic mercury and vitriol of Cyprus, and put


back to cook in hog fat for lack of any radish oil, Úrsula’s precious inheritance was reduced to a
large piece of burnt hog cracklings that was firmly stuck to the bottom of the pot.

When the gypsies came back, Úrsula had turned the whole population of the village against them.
But curiosity was greater than fear, for that time the gypsies went about the town making a
deafening noise with all manner of musical instruments while a hawker announced the exhibition of
the most fabulous discovery of the Naciancenes. So that everyone went to the tent and by paying
one cent they saw a youthful Melquíades, recovered, unwrinkled, with a new and flashing set of
teeth. Those who remembered his gums that had been destroyed by scurvy, his flaccid cheeks, and
his withered lips trembled with fear at the final proof of the gypsy’s supernatural power. The fear
turned into panic when Melquíades took out his teeth, intact, encased in their gums, and showed
them to the audience for an instant—a fleeting instant in which he went back to being the same
decrepit man of years past—and put them back again and smiled once more with the full control of
his restored youth. Even José Arcadio Buendía himself considered that Melquíades’ knowledge had
reached unbearable extremes, but he felt a healthy excitement when the gypsy explained to him
atone the workings of his false teeth. It seemed so simple and so prodigious at the same time that
overnight he lost all interest in his experiments in alchemy. He underwent a new crisis of bad
humor. He did not go back to eating regularly, and he would spend the day walking through the
house. “Incredible things are happening in the world,” he said to Úrsula. “Right there across the
river there are all kinds of magical instruments while we keep on living like donkeys.” Those who
had known him since the foundation of Macondo were startled at how much he had changed under
Melquíades’ influence.

At first José Arcadio Buendía had been a kind of youthful patriarch who would give instructions
for planting and advice for the raising of children and animals, and who collaborated with everyone,
even in the physical work, for the welfare of the community. Since his house from the very first had
been the best in the village, the others had been built in its image and likeness. It had a small, well-
lighted living roost, a dining room in the shape of a terrace with gaily colored flowers, two
bedrooms, a courtyard with a gigantic chestnut tree, a well kept garden, and a corral where goats,
pigs, and hens lived in peaceful communion. The only animals that were prohibited, not just in his
house but in the entire settlement, were fighting cocks.

Úrsula’s capacity for work was the same as that of her husband. Active, small, severe, that woman
of unbreakable nerves who at no moment in her life had been heard to sing seemed to be
everywhere, from dawn until quite late at night, always pursued by the soft whispering of her stiff,
starched petticoats. Thanks to her the floors of tamped earth, the unwhitewashed mud walls, the
rustic, wooden furniture they had built themselves were always dean, and the old chests where they
kept their clothes exhaled the warm smell of basil.

José Arcadio Buendía, who was the most enterprising man ever to be seen in the village, had set
up the placement of the houses in such a way that from all of them one could reach the river and
draw water with the same effort, and he had lined up the streets with such good sense that no house
got more sun than another during the hot time of day. Within a few years Macondo was a village
that was more orderly and hard working than any known until then by its three hundred inhabitants.
It was a truly happy village where no one was over thirty years of age and where no one had died.

Since the time of its founding, José Arcadio Buendía had built traps and cages. In a short time he
filled not only his own house but all of those in the village with troupials, canaries, bee eaters, and
redbreasts. The concert of so many different birds became so disturbing that Úrsula would plug her
ears with beeswax so as not to lose her sense of reality. The first time that Melquíades’ tribe arrived,
selling glass balls for headaches, everyone was surprised that they had been able to find that village
lost in the drowsiness of the swamp, and the gypsies confessed that they had found their way by the
song of the birds.


That spirit of social initiative disappeared in a short time, pulled away by the fever of the
magnets, the astronomical calculations, the dreams of transmutation, and the urge to discover the
wonders of the world. From a clean and active man, José Arcadio Buendía changed into a man lazy
in appearance, careless in his dress, with a wild beard that Úrsula managed to trim with great effort
and a kitchen knife. There were many who considered him the victim of some strange spell. But
even those most convinced of his madness left work and family to follow him when he brought out
his tools to clear the land and asked the assembled group to open a way that would put Macondo in
contact with the great inventions.

José Arcadio Buendía was completely ignorant of the geography of the region. He knew that to
the east there lay an impenetrable mountain chain and that on the other side of the mountains there
was the ardent city of Riohacha, where in times past—according to what he had been told by the
first Aureliano Buendía, his grandfather—Sir Francis Drake had gone crocodile hunting with
cannons and that he repaired hem and stuffed them with straw to bring to Queen Elizabeth. In his
youth, José Arcadio Buendía and his men, with wives and children, animals and all kinds of domestic
implements, had crossed the mountains in search of an outlet to the sea, and after twenty-six
months they gave up the expedition and founded Macondo, so they would not have to go back. It
was, therefore, a route that did not interest him, for it could lead only to the past. To the south lay
the swamps, covered with an eternal vegetable scum and the whole vast universe of the great
swamp, which, according to what the gypsies said, had no limits. The great swamp in the west
mingled with a boundless extension of water where there were soft-skinned cetaceans that had the
head and torso of a woman, causing the ruination of sailors with the charm of their extraordinary
breasts. The gypsies sailed along that route for six months before they reached the strip of land over
which the mules that carried the mail passed. According to José Arcadio Buendía’s calculations, the
only possibility of contact with civilization lay along the northern route. So he handed out clearing
tools and hunting weapons to the same men who had been with him during the founding of
Macondo. He threw his directional instruments and his maps into a knapsack, and he undertook the
reckless adventure.

During the first days they did not come across any appreciable obstacle. They went down along
the stony bank of the river to the place where years before they had found the soldier’s armor, and
from there they went into the woods along a path between wild orange trees. At the end of the first
week they killed and roasted a deer, but they agreed to eat only half of it and salt the rest for the days
that lay ahead. With that precaution they tried to postpone the necessity of having to eat macaws,
whose blue flesh had a harsh and musky taste. Then, for more than ten days, they did not see the
sun again. The ground became soft and damp, like volcanic ash, and the vegetation was thicker and
thicker, and the cries of the birds and the uproar of the monkeys became more and more remote,
and the world became eternally sad. The men on the expedition felt overwhelmed by their most
ancient memories in that paradise of dampness and silence, going back to before original sin, as their
boots sank into pools of steaming oil and their machetes destroyed bloody lilies and golden salaman-
ders. For a week, almost without speaking, they went ahead like sleepwalkers through a universe of
grief, lighted only by the tenuous reflection of luminous insects, and their lungs were overwhelmed
by a suffocating smell of blood. They could not return because the strip that they were opening as
they went along would soon close up with a new vegetation that. almost seemed to grow before
their eyes. “It’s all right,” José Arcadio Buendía would say. “The main thing is not to lose our
bearings.” Always following his compass, he kept on guiding his men toward the invisible north so
that they would be able to get out of that enchanted region. It was a thick night, starless, but the
darkness was becoming impregnated with a fresh and clear air. Exhausted by the long crossing, they
hung up their hammocks and slept deeply for the first time in two weeks. When they woke up, with
the sun already high in the sky, they were speechless with fascination. Before them, surrounded by


ferns and palm trees, white and powdery in the silent morning light, was an enormous Spanish
galleon. Tilted slightly to the starboard, it had hanging from its intact masts the dirty rags of its sails
in the midst of its rigging, which was adorned with orchids. The hull, covered with an armor of
petrified barnacles and soft moss, was firmly fastened into a surface of stones. The whole structure
seemed to occupy its own space, one of solitude and oblivion, protected from the vices of time and
the habits of the birds. Inside, where the expeditionaries explored with careful intent, there was
nothing but a thick forest of flowers.

The discovery of the galleon, an indication of the proximity of the sea, broke José Arcadio
Buendía’s drive. He considered it a trick of his whimsical fate to have searched for the sea without
finding it, at the cost of countless sacrifices and suffering, and to have found it all of a sudden
without looking for it, as if it lay across his path like an insurmountable object. Many years later
Colonel Aureliano Buendía crossed the region again, when it was already a regular mail route, and
the only part of the ship he found was its burned-out frame in the midst of a field of poppies. Only
then, convinced that the story had not been some product of his father’s imagination, did he wonder
how the galleon had been able to get inland to that spot. But José Arcadio Buendía did not concern
himself with that when he found the sea after another four days’ journey from the galleon. His
dreams ended as he faced that ashen, foamy, dirty sea, which had not merited the risks and sacrifices
of the adventure.

“God damn it!” he shouted. “Macondo is surrounded by water on all sides.”

The idea of a peninsular Macondo prevailed for a long time, inspired by the arbitrary map that
José Arcadio Buendía sketched on his return from the expedition. He drew it in rage, evilly,
exaggerating the difficulties of communication, as if to punish himself for the absolute lack of sense
with which he had chosen the place. “We’ll never get anywhere,” he lamented to Úrsula. “We’re
going to rot our lives away here without receiving the benefits of science.” That certainty, mulled
over for several months in the small room he used as his laboratory, brought him to the conception
of the plan to move Maeondo to a better place. But that time Úrsula had anticipated his feverish
designs. With the secret and implacable labor of a small ant she predisposed the women of the
village against the flightiness of their husbands, who were already preparing for the move. José
Arcadio Buendía did not know at what moment or because of what adverse forces his plan had
become enveloped in a web of pretexts, disappointments, and evasions until it turned into nothing
but an illusion. Úrsula watched him with innocent attention and even felt some pity for him on the
morning when she found him in the back room muttering about his plans for moving as he placed
his laboratory pieces in their original boxes. She let him finish. She let him nail up the boxes and put
his initials on them with an inked brush, without reproaching him, but knowing now that he knew
(because she had heard him say so in his soft monologues) that the men of the village would not
back him up in his undertaking. Only when he began to take down the door of the room did Úrsula
dare ask him what he was doing, and he answered with a certain bitterness. “Since no one wants to
leave, we’ll leave all by ourselves.” Úrsula did not become upset.

“We will not leave,” she said. “We will stay here, because we have had a son here.”

“We have still not had a death,” he said. “A person does not belong to a place until there is
someone dead under the ground.”

Úrsula replied with a soft firmness:

“If I have to die for the rest of you to stay here, I will die.”

José Arcadio Buendía had not thought that his wife’s will was so firm. He tried to seduce her
with the charm of his fantasy, with the promise of a prodigious world where all one had to do was
sprinkle some magic liquid on the ground and the plants would bear fruit whenever a man wished,
and where all manner of instruments against pain were sold at bargain prices. But Úrsula was
insensible to his clairvoyance.


“Instead of going around thinking about your crazy inventions, you should be worrying about
your sons,” she replied. “Look at the state they’re in, running wild just like donkeys.”

José Arcadio Buendía took his wife’s words literally. He looked out the window and saw the
barefoot children in the sunny garden and he had the impression that only at that instant had they
begun to exist, conceived by Úrsula’s spell, Something occurred inside of him then, something
mysterious and definitive that uprooted him from his own time and carried him adrift through an
unexplored region of his memory. While Úrsula continued sweeping the house, which was safe now
from being abandoned for the rest of her life, he stood there with an absorbed look, contemplating
the children until his eyes became moist and he dried them with the back of his hand, exhaling a
deep sigh of resignation.

“All right,” he said. “Tell them to come help me take the things out of the boxes.”

José Arcadio, the older of the children, was fourteen. He had a square head, thick hair, and his
father’s character. Although he had the same impulse for growth and physical strength, it was early
evident that he lacked imagination. He had been conceived and born during the difficult crossing of
the mountains, before the founding of Macondo, and his parents gave thanks to heaven when they
saw he had no animal features. Aureliano, the first human being to be born in Macondo, would be
six years old in March. He was silent and withdrawn. He had wept in his mother’s womb and had
been born with his eyes open. As they were cutting the umbilical cord, he moved his head from side
to side, taking in the things in the room and examining the faces of the people with a fearless
curiosity. Then, indifferent to those who came close to look at him, he kept his attention
concentrated on the palm roof, which looked as if it were about to collapse under the tremendous
pressure of the rain. Úrsula did not remember the intensity of that look again until one day when
little Aureliano, at the age of three, went into the kitchen at the moment she was taking a pot of
boiling soup from the stove and putting it on the table. The child, Perplexed, said from the doorway,
“It’s going to spill.” The pot was firmly placed in the center of the table, but just as soon as the child
made his announcement, it began an unmistakable movement toward the edge, as if impelled by
some inner dynamism, and it fell and broke on the floor. Úrsula, alarmed, told her husband about
the episode, but he interpreted it as a natural phenomenon. That was the way he always was alien to
the existence of his sons, partly because he considered childhood as a period of mental insufficiency,
and partly because he was always too absorbed in his fantastic speculations.

But since the afternoon when he called the children in to help him unpack the things in the
laboratory, he gave them his best hours. In the small separate room, where the walls were gradually
being covered by strange maps and fabulous drawings, he taught them to read and write and do
sums, and he spoke to them about the wonders of the world, not only where his learning had
extended, but forcing the limits of his imagination to extremes. It was in that way that the boys
ended up learning that in the southern extremes of Africa there were men so intelligent and peaceful
that their only pastime was to sit and think, and that it was possible to cross the Aegean Sea on foot
by jumping from island to island all the way to the port of Salonika. Those hallucinating sessions
remained printed on the memories of the boys in such a way that many years later, a second before
the regular army officer gave the firing squad the command to fire, Colonel Aureliano Buendía saw
once more that warm March afternoon on which his father had interrupted the lesson in physics and
stood fascinated, with his hand in the air and his eyes motionless, listening to the distant pipes,
drums, and jingles of the gypsies, who were coming to the village once more, announcing the latest
and most startling discovery of the sages of Memphis.

They were new gypsies, young men and women who knew only their own language, handsome
specimens with oily skins and intelligent hands, whose dances and music sowed a panic of
uproarious joy through the streets, with parrots painted all colors reciting Italian arias, and a hen
who laid a hundred golden eggs to the sound of a tambourine, and a trained monkey who read


minds, and the multi-use machine that could be used at the same time to sew on buttons and reduce
fevers, and the apparatus to make a person forget his bad memories, and a poultice to lose time, and
a thousand more inventions so ingenious and unusual that José Arcadio Buendía must have wanted
to invent a memory machine so that he could remember them all. In an instant they transformed the
village. The inhabitants of Macondo found themselves lost is their own streets, confused by the
crowded fair.

Holding a child by each hand so as not to lose them in the tumult, bumping into acrobats with
gold-capped teeth and jugglers with six arms, suffocated by the mingled breath of manure and
sandals that the crowd exhaled, José Arcadio Buendía went about everywhere like a madman,
looking for Melquíades so that he could reveal to him the infinite secrets of that fabulous nightmare.
He asked several gypsies, who did not understand his language. Finally he reached the place where
Melquíades used to set up his tent and he found a taciturn Armenian who in Spanish was hawking a
syrup to make oneself invisible. He had drunk down a glass of the amber substance in one gulp as
José Arcadio Buendía elbowed his way through the absorbed group that was witnessing the
spectacle, and was able to ask his question. The gypsy wrapped him in the frightful climate of his
look before he turned into a puddle of pestilential and smoking pitch over which the echo of his
reply still floated: “Melquíades is dead.” Upset by the news, José Arcadio Buendía stood motionless,
trying to rise above his affliction, until the group dispersed, called away by other artifices, and the
puddle of the taciturn Armenian evaporated completely. Other gypsies confirmed later on that
Melquíades had in fact succumbed to the fever on the beach at Singapore and that his body had
been thrown into the deepest part of the Java Sea. The children had no interest in the news. They
insisted that their father take them to see the overwhelming novelty of the sages of Memphis that
was being advertised at the entrance of a tent that, according to what was said, had belonged to King
Solomon. They insisted so much that José Arcadio Buendía paid the thirty reales and led them into
the center of the tent, where there was a giant with a hairy torso and a shaved head, with a copper
ring in his nose and a heavy iron chain on his ankle, watching over a pirate chest. When it was
opened by the giant, the chest gave off a glacial exhalation. Inside there was only an enormous,
transparent block with infinite internal needles in which the light of the sunset was broken up into
colored stars. Disconcerted, knowing that the children were waiting for an immediate explanation,
José Arcadio Buendía ventured a murmur:

“It’s the largest diamond in the world.”

“No,” the gypsy countered. “It’s ice.”

José Arcadio Buendía, without understanding, stretched out his hand toward the cake, but the
giant moved it away. “Five reales more to touch it,” he said. José Arcadio Buendía paid them and
put his hand on the ice and held it there for several minutes as his heart filled with fear and
jubilation at the contact with mystery. Without knowing what to say, he paid ten reales more so that
his sons could have that prodigious experience. Little José Arcadio refused to touch it. Aureliano, on
the other hand, took a step forward and put his hand on it, withdrawing it immediately. “It’s
boiling,” he exclaimed, startled. But his father paid no attention to him. Intoxicated by the evidence
of the miracle, he forgot at that moment about the frustration of his delirious undertakings and
Melquíades’ body, abandoned to the appetite of the squids. He paid another five reales and with his
hand on the cake, as if giving testimony on the holy scriptures, he exclaimed:

“This is the great invention of our time.”


Chapter 2

WHEN THE PIRATE Sir Francis Drake attacked Riohacha in the sixteenth century, Úrsula Iguarán’s
great-great-grandmother became so frightened with the ringing of alarm bells and the firing of
cannons that she lost control of her nerves and sat down on a lighted stove. The burns changed her
into a useless wife for the rest of her days. She could only sit on one side, cushioned by pillows, and
something strange must have happened to her way of walking, for she never walked again in public.
She gave up all kinds of social activity, obsessed with the notion that her body gave off a singed
odor. Dawn would find her in the courtyard, for she did not dare fall asleep lest she dream of the
English and their ferocious attack dogs as they came through the windows of her bedroom to
submit her to shameful tortures with their red-hot irons. Her husband, an Aragonese merchant by
whom she had two children, spent half the value of his store on medicines and pastimes in an
attempt to alleviate her terror. Finally he sold the business and took the family to live far from the
sea in a settlement of peaceful Indians located in the foothills, where he built his wife a bedroom
without windows so that the pirates of her dream would have no way to get in.

In that hidden village there was a native-born tobacco planter who had lived there for some time,
Don José Arcadio Buendía, with whom Úrsula’s great-great-grandfather established a partnership
that was so lucrative that within a few years they made a fortune. Several centuries later the great-
great-grandson of the native-born planter married the great-great-granddaughter of the Aragonese.
Therefore, every time that Úrsula became exercised over her husband’s mad ideas, she would leap
back over three hundred years of fate and curse the day that Sir Francis Drake had attacked
Riohacha. It was simply a way. of giving herself some relief, because actually they were joined till
death by a bond that was more solid that love: a common prick of conscience. They were cousins.
They had grown up together in the old village that both of their ancestors, with their work and their
good habits, had transformed into one of the finest towns in the province. Although their marriage
was predicted from the time they had come into the world, when they expressed their desire to be
married their own relatives tried to stop it. They were afraid that those two healthy products of two
races that had interbred over the centuries would suffer the shame of breeding iguanas. There had
already been a horrible precedent. An aunt of Úrsula’s, married to an uncle of José Arcadio Buendía,
had a son who went through life wearing loose, baggy trousers and who bled to death after having
lived forty-two years in the purest state of virginity, for he had been born and had grown up with a
cartilaginous tail in the shape of a corkscrew and with a small tuft of hair on the tip. A pig’s tail that
was never allowed to be seen by any woman and that cost him his life when a butcher friend did him
the favor of chopping it off with his cleaver. José Arcadio Buendía, with the whimsy of his nineteen
years, resolved the problem with a single phrase: “I don’t care if I have piglets as long as they can
talk.” So they were married amidst a festival of fireworks and a brass band that went on for three
days. They would have been happy from then on if Úrsula’s mother had not terrified her with all
manner of sinister predictions about their offspring, even to the extreme of advising her to refuse to
consummate the marriage. Fearing that her stout and willful husband would rape her while she slept,
Úrsula, before going to bed, would put on a rudimentary kind of drawers that her mother had made
out of sailcloth and had reinforced with a system of crisscrossed leather straps and that was closed in
the front by a thick iron buckle. That was how they lived for several months. During the day he
would take care of his fighting cocks and she would do frame embroidery with her mother. At night
they would wrestle for several hours in an anguished violence that seemed to be a substitute for the
act of love, until popular intuition got a whiff of something irregular and the rumor spread that


Úrsula was still a virgin a year after her marriage because her husband was impotent. José Arcadio
Buendía was the last one to hear the rumor.

“Look at what people are going around saying, Úrsula,” he told his wife very calmly.

“Let them talk,” she said. “We know that it’s not true.”

So the situation went on the same way for another six months until that tragic Sunday when José
Arcadio Buendía won a cockfight from Prudencio Aguilar. Furious, aroused by the blood of his bird,
the loser backed away from José Arcadio Buendía so that everyone in the cockpit could hear what
he was going to tell him.

“Congratulations!” he shouted. “Maybe that rooster of yours can do your wife a favor.”

José Arcadio Buendía serenely picked up his rooster. “I’ll be right back,” he told everyone. And
then to Prudencio Aguilar:

“You go home and get a weapon, because I’m going to kill you.”

Ten minutes later he returned with the notched spear that had belonged to his grandfather. At
the door to the cockpit, where half the town had gathered, Prudencio Aguilar was waiting for him.
There was no time to defend himself. José Arcadio Buendía’s spear, thrown with the strength of a
bull and with the same good aim with which the first Aureliano Buendía had exterminated the
jaguars in the region, pierced his throat. That night, as they held a wake over the corpse in the
cockpit, José Arcadio Buendía went into the bedroom as his wife was putting on her chastity pants.
Pointing the spear at her he ordered: “Take them off.” Úrsula had no doubt about her husband’s
decision. “You’ll be responsible for what happens,” she murmured. José Arcadio Buendía stuck the
spear into the dirt floor.

“If you bear iguanas, we’ll raise iguanas,” he said. “But there’ll be no more killings in this town
because of you.”

It was a fine June night, cool and with a moon, and they were awake and frolicking in bed until
dawn, indifferent to the breeze that passed through the bedroom, loaded with the weeping of
Prudencio Aguilar’s kin.

The matter was put down as a duel of honor, but both of them were left with a twinge in their
conscience. One night, when she could not sleep, Úrsula went out into the courtyard to get some
water and she saw Prudencio Aguilar by the water jar. He was livid, a sad expression on his face,
trying to cover the hole in his throat with a plug made of esparto grass. It did not bring on fear in
her, but pity. She went back to the room and told her husband what she had seen, but he did not
think much of it. “This just means that we can’t stand the weight of our conscience.” Two nights
later Úrsula saw Prudencio Aguilar again, in the bathroom, using the esparto plug to wash the
clotted blood from his throat. On another night she saw him strolling in the rain. José Arcadio
Buendía, annoyed by his wife’s hallucinations, went out into the courtyard armed with the spear.
There was the dead man with his sad expression.

“You go to hell,” José Arcadio Buendía shouted at him. “Just as many times as you come back,
I’ll kill you again.”

Prudencio Aguilar did not go away, nor did José Arcadio Buendía dare throw the spear. He never
slept well after that. He was tormented by the immense desolation with which the dead man had
looked at him through the rain, his deep nostalgia as he yearned for living people, the anxiety with
which he searched through the house looking for some water with which to soak his esparto plug.
“He must be suffering a great deal,” he said to Úrsula. “You can see that he’s so very lonely.” She
was so moved that the next time she saw the dead man uncovering the pots on the stove she
understood what he was looking for, and from then on she placed water jugs all about the house.
One night when he found him washing his wound in his own room, José Anedio Buendía could no
longer resist.


“It’s all right, Prudencio,” he told him. “We’re going to leave this town, just as far away as we
can go, and we’ll never come back. Go in peace now.”

That was how they undertook the crossing of the mountains. Several friends of José Arcadio
Buendía, young men like him, excited, by the adventure, dismantled their houses and packed up,
along with their wives and children, to head toward the land that no one had promised them. Before
he left, José Arcadio Buendía buried the spear in the courtyard and, one after the other, he cut the
throats of his magnificent fighting cocks, trusting that in that way he could give some measure of
peace to Prudencio Aguilar. All that Úrsula took along were a trunk with her bridal clothes, a few
household utensils, and the small chest with the gold pieces that she had inherited from her father.
They did not lay out any definite itinerary. They simply tried to go in a direction opposite to the road
to Riohacha so that they would not leave any trace or meet any people they knew. It was an absurd
journey. After fourteen months, her stomach corrupted by monkey meat and snake stew, Úrsula
gave birth to a son who had all of his features human. She had traveled half of the trip in a
hammock that two men carried on their shoulders, because swelling had disfigured her legs and her
varicose veins had puffed up like bubbles. Although it was pitiful to see them with their sunken
stomachs and languid eyes, the children survived the journey better than their parents, and most of
the time it was fun for them. One morning, after almost two years of crossing, they became the first
mortals to see the western slopes of the mountain range. From the cloudy summit they saw the
immense aquatic expanse of the great swamp as it spread out toward the other side of the world. But
they never found the sea. One night, after several months of lost wandering through the swamps, far
away now from the last Indians they had met on their way, they camped on the banks of a stony
river whose waters were like a torrent of frozen glass. Years later, during the second civil war,
Colonel Aureliano Buendía tried to follow that same route in order to take Riohacha by surprise and
after six days of traveling he understood that it was madness. Nevertheless, the night on which they
camped beside the river, his father’s host had the look of shipwrecked people with no escape, but
their number had grown during the crossing and they were all prepared (and they succeeded) to die
of old age. José Arcadio Buendía dreamed that night that right there a noisy city with houses having
mirror wails rose up. He asked what city it was and they answered him with a name that he had
never heard, that had no meaning at all, but that had a supernatural echo in his dream: Macondo. On
the following day he convinced his men that they would never find the sea. He ordered them to cut
down the trees to make a clearing beside the river, at the coolest spot on the bank, and there they
founded the village.

José Arcadio Buendía did not succeed in deciphering the dream of houses with mirror walls until
the day he discovered ice. Then he thought he understood its deep meaning. He thought that in the
near future they would be able to manufacture blocks of ice on a large scale from such a common
material as water and with them build the new houses of the village. Macondo would no longer be a
burning place, where the hinges and door knockers twisted with the heat, but would be changed into
a wintry city. If he did not persevere in his attempts to build an ice factory, it was because at that
time he was absolutely enthusiastic over the education of his sons, especially that of Aureliano, who
from the first had revealed a strange intuition for alchemy. The laboratory had been dusted off.
Reviewing Melquíades’ notes, serene now, without the exaltation of novelty, in prolonged and
patient sessions they tried to separate Úrsula’s gold from the debris that was stuck to the bottom of
the pot. Young José Arcadio scarcely took part in the process. While his father was involved body
and soul with his water pipe, the willful first-born, who had always been too big for his age, had
become a monumental adolescent. His voice had changed. An incipient fuzz appeared on his upper
lip. One night, as Úrsula went into the room where he was undressing to go to bed, she felt a
mingled sense of shame and pity: he was the first man that she had seen naked after her husband,


and he was so well-equipped for life that he seemed abnormal. Úrsula, pregnant for the third time,
relived her newlywed terror.

Around that time a merry, foul-mouthed, provocative woman came to the house to help with the
chorea, and she knew how to read the future in cards. Úrsula spoke to her about her son. She
thought that his disproportionate size was something as unnatural as her cousin’s tail of a pig.
The woman let out an expansive laugh that resounded through the house like a spray of broken
glass. “Just the opposite,” she said. “He’ll be very lucky.” In order to confirm her prediction she
brought her cards to the house a few days later and locked herself up with José Arcadio in a granary
off the kitchen. She calmly placed her cards on an old carpenter’s bench. saying anything that came
into her head, while the boy waited beside her, more bored than intrigued. Suddenly she reached out
her hand and touched him. “Lordy!” she said, sincerely startled, and that was all she could say. José
Arcadio felt his bones filling up with foam, a languid fear, and a terrible desire to weep. The woman
made no insinuations. But José Arcadio kept looking for her all night long, for the smell of smoke
that she had under her armpits and that had got caught under his skin. He wanted to be with her all
the time, he wanted her to be his mother, for them never to leave the granary, and for her to say
“Lordy!” to him. One day he could not stand it any more and. he went looking for her at her house:
He made a formal visit, sitting uncomprehendingly in the living room without saying a word. At
that moment he had no desire for her. He found her different, entirely foreign to the image that her
smell brought on, as if she were someone else. He drank his coffee and left the house in depression.
That night, during the frightful time of lying awake, he desired her again with a brutal anxiety, but he
did not want her that time as she had been in the granary but as she had been that afternoon.

Days later the woman suddenly called him to her house, where she was alone with her mother,
and she had him come into the bedroom with the pretext of showing him a deck of cards. Then
she touched him with such freedom that he suffered a delusion after the initial shudder, and he felt
more fear than pleasure. She asked him to come and see her that night. He agreed. in order to get
away, knowing that he was incapable of going. But that night, in his burning bed, he understood that
he had to go we her, even if he were not capable. He got dressed by feel, listening in the dark to his
brother’s calm breathing, the dry cough of his father in the next room, the asthma of the hens in the
courtyard, the buzz of the mosquitoes, the beating of his heart, and the inordinate bustle of a world
that he had not noticed until then, and he went out into the sleeping street. With all his heart he
wanted the door to be barred and not just closed as she had promised him. But it was open. He
pushed it with the tips of his fingers and the hinges yielded with a mournful and articulate moan that
left a frozen echo inside of him. From the moment he entered, sideways and trying not to make a
noise, he caught the smell. He was still in the hallway, where the woman’s three brothers had their
hammocks in positions that he could not see and that he could not determine in the darkness as he
felt his way along the hall to push open the bedroom door and get his bearings there so as not to
mistake the bed. He found it. He bumped against the ropes of the hammocks, which were lower
than he had suspected, and a man who had been snoring until then turned in his sleep and said in a
kind of delusion, “It was Wednesday.” When he pushed open the bedroom door, he could not
prevent it from scraping against the uneven floor. Suddenly, in the absolute darkness, he understood
with a hopeless nostalgia that he was completely disoriented. Sleeping in the narrow room were the
mother, another daughter with her husband and two children, and the woman, who may not have
been there. He could have guided himself by the smell if the smell had not been all over the house,
so devious and at the same time so definite, as it had always been on his skin. He did not move for a
long time, wondering in fright how he had ever got to that abyss of abandonment, when a hand with
all its fingers extended and feeling about in the darkness touched his face. He was not surprised, for
without knowing, he had been expecting it. Then he gave himself over to that hand, and in a terrible
state of exhaustion he let himself be led to a shapeless place where his clothes were taken off and he


was heaved about like a sack of potatoes and thrown from one side to the other in a bottomless
darkness in which his arms were useless, where it no longer smelled of woman but of ammonia, and
where he tried to remember her face and found before him the face of Úrsula, confusedly aware that
he was doing something that for a very long time he had wanted to do but that he had imagined
could really never be done, not knowing what he was doing because he did not know where his feet
were or where his head was, or whose feet or whose head, and feeling that he could no longer resist
the glacial rumbling of his kidneys and the air of his intestines, and fear, and the bewildered anxiety
to flee and at the same time stay forever in that exasperated silence and that fearful solitude.

Her name was Pilar Ternera. She had been part of the exodus that ended with the founding of
Macondo, dragged along by her family in order to separate her from the man who had raped her at
fourteen and had continued to love her until she was twenty-two, but who never made up his mind
to make the situation public because he was a man apart. He promised to follow her to the ends of
the earth, but only later on, when he put his affairs in order, and she had become tired of waiting for
him, always identifying him with the tall and short, blond and brunet men that her cards promised
from land and sea within three days, three months, or three years. With her waiting she had lost the
strength of her thighs, the firmness of her breasts, her habit of tenderness, but she kept the madness
of her heart intact. Maddened by that prodigious plaything, José Arcadio followed her path every
night through the labyrinth of the room. On a certain occasion he found the door barred, and he
knocked several times, knowing that if he had the boldness to knock the first time he would have
had to knock until the last, and after an interminable wait she opened the door for him. During the
day, lying down to dream, he would secretly enjoy the memories of the night before. But when she
came into the house, merry, indifferent, chatty, he did not have to make any effort to hide his
tension, because that woman, whose explosive laugh frightened off the doves, had nothing to do
with the invisible power that taught him how to breathe from within and control his heartbeats, and
that had permitted him to understand why man are afraid of death. He was so wrapped up in
himself that he did not even understand the joy of everyone when his father and his brother aroused
the household with the news that they had succeeded in penetrating the metallic debris and had
separated Úrsula’s gold.

They had succeeded, as a matter of fact, after putting in complicated and persevering days at it.
Úrsula was happy, and she even gave thanks to God for the invention of alchemy, while the people
of the village crushed into the laboratory, and they served them guava jelly on crackers to celebrate
the wonder, and José Arcadio Buendía let them see the crucible with the recovered gold, as if he had
just invented it. Showing it all around, he ended up in front of his older son, who during the past
few days had barely put in an appearance in the laboratory. He put the dry and yellowish mass in
front of his eyes and asked him: “What does it look like to you?” José Arcadio answered sincerely:

“Dog shit.”

His father gave him a blow with the back of his hand that brought out blood and tears. That
night Pilar Ternera put arnica compresses on the swelling, feeling about for the bottle and cotton in
the dark, and she did everything she wanted with him as long as it did not bother him, making an
effort to love him without hurting him. They reached such a state of intimacy that later, without
realizing it, they were whispering to each other.

“I want to be alone with you,” he said. “One of these days I’m going to tell everybody and we
can stop all of this sneaking around.”

She did not try to calm him down.

“That would be fine,” she said “If we’re alone, we’ll leave the lamp lighted so that we can see
each other, and I can holler as much as I want without anybody’s having to butt in, and you can
whisper in my ear any crap you can think of.”


That conversation, the biting rancor that he felt against his father, and the imminent possibility of
wild love inspired a serene courage in him. In a spontaneous way, without any preparation, he told
everything to his brother.

At first young Aureliano understood only the risk, the immense possibility of danger that his
brother’s adventures implied, and he could not understand the fascination of the subject. Little by
little he became contaminated with the anxiety. He wondered about the details of the dangers, he
identified himself with the suffering and enjoyment of his brother, he felt frightened and happy. He
would stay awake waiting for him until dawn in the solitary bed that seemed to have a bottom of live
coals, and they would keep on talking until it was time to get up, so that both of them soon suffered
from the same drowsiness, felt the same lack of interest in alchemy and the wisdom of their father,
and they took refuge in solitude. “Those kids are out of their heads,” Úrsula said. “They must have
worms.” She prepared a repugnant potion for them made out of mashed wormseed, which they
both drank with unforeseen stoicism, and they sat down at the same time on their pots eleven times
in a single day, expelling some rose-colored parasites that they showed to everybody with great
jubilation, for it allowed them to deceive Úrsula as to the origin of their distractions and drowsiness.
Aureliano not only understood by then, he also lived his brother’s experiences as something of his
own, for on one occasion when the latter was explaining in great detail the mechanism of love, he
interrupted him to ask: “What does it feel like?” José Arcadio gave an immediate reply:

“It’s like an earthquake.”

One January Thursday at two o’clock in the morning, Amaranta was born. Before anyone came
into the room, Úrsula examined her carefully. She was light and watery, like a newt, but all of her
parts were human: Aureliano did not notice the new thing except when the house became full of
people. Protected by the confusion, he went off in search of his brother, who had not been in bed
since eleven o’clock, and it was such an impulsive decision that he did not even have time to ask
himself how he could get him out of Pilar Ternera’s bedroom. He circled the house for several
hours, whistling private calls, until the proximity of dawn forced him to go home. In his mother’s
room, playing with the newborn little sister and with a face that drooped with innocence, he found
José Arcadio.

Úrsula was barely over her forty days’ rest when the gypsies returned. They were the same
acrobats and jugglers that had brought the ice. Unlike Melquíades’ tribe, they had shown very
quickly that they were not heralds of progress but purveyors of amusement. Even when they
brought the ice they did not advertise it for its usefulness in the life of man but as a simple circus
curiosity. This time, along with many other artifices, they brought a flying carpet. But they did not
offer it as a fundamental contribution to the development of transport, rather as an object of
recreation. The people at once dug up their last gold pieces to take advantage of a quick flight over
the houses of the village. Protected by the delightful cover of collective disorder, José Arcadio and
Pilar passed many relaxing hours. They were two happy lovers among the crowd, and they even
came to suspect that love could be a feeling that was more relaxing and deep than the happiness,
wild but momentary, of their secret nights. Pilar, however, broke the spell. Stimulated by the
enthusiasm that José Arcadio showed in her companionship, she confused the form and the
occasion, and all of a sudden she threw the whole world on top of him. “Now you really are a man,”
she told him. And since he did not understand what she meant, she spelled it out to him.

“You’re going to be a father.”

José Arcadio did not dare leave the house for several days. It was enough for him to hear the
rocking laughter of Pilar in the kitchen to run and take refuge in the laboratory, where the artifacts
of alchemy had come alive again with Úrsula’s blessing. José Arcadio Buendía received his errant son
with joy and initiated him in the search for the philosopher’s stone, which he had finally undertaken.
One afternoon the boys grew enthusiastic over the flying carpet that went swiftly by the laboratory


at window level carrying the gypsy who was driving it and several children from the village who were
merrily waving their hands, but José Arcadio Buendía did not even look at it. “Let them dream,” he
said. “We’ll do better flying than they are doing, and with more scientific resources than a miserable
bedspread.” In spite of his feigned interest, José Arcadio must understood the powers of the
philosopher’s egg, which to him looked like a poorly blown bottle. He did not succeed in escaping
from his worries. He lost his appetite and he could not sleep. He fell into an ill humor, the same as
his father’s over the failure of his undertakings, and such was his upset that José Arcadio Buendía
himself relieved him of his duties in the laboratory, thinking that he had taken alchemy too much to
heart. Aureliano, of course, understood that his brother’s affliction did not have its source in the
search for the philosopher’s stone but he could not get into his confidence. He had lost his former
spontaneity. From an accomplice and a communicative person he had become withdrawn and
hostile. Anxious for solitude, bitten by a virulent rancor against the world, one night he left his bed
as usual, but he did not go to Pilar Ternera’s house, but to mingle is the tumult of the fair. After
wandering about among all kinds of contraptions with out becoming interested in any of them, he
spotted something that was not a part of it all: a very young gypsy girl, almost a child, who was
weighted down by beads and was the most beautiful woman that José Arcadio had ever seen in his
life. She was in the crowd that was witnessing the sad spectacle of the man who had been turned
into a snake for having disobeyed his parents.

José Arcadio paid no attention. While the sad interrogation of the snake-man was taking place, he
made his way through the crowd up to the front row, where the gypsy girl was, and he stooped
behind her. He pressed against her back. The girl tried to separate herself, but José Arcadio pressed
more strongly against her back. Then she felt him. She remained motionless against him, trembling
with surprise and fear, unable to believe the evidence, and finally she turned her head and looked at
him with a tremulous smile. At that instant two gypsies put the snake-man into his cage and carried
him into the tent. The gypsy who was conducting the show announced:

“And now, ladies and gentlemen, we are going to show the terrible test of the woman who must
have her head chopped off every night at this time for one hundred and fifty years as punishment
for having seen what she should not have.”

José Arcadio and the gypsy girl did not witness the decapitation. They went to her tent, where
they kissed each other with a desperate anxiety while they took off their clothes. The gypsy girl
removed the starched lace corsets she had on and there she was, changed into practically nothing.
She was a languid little frog, with incipient breasts and legs so thin that they did not even match the
size of José Arcadio’s arms, but she had a decision and a warmth that compensated for her fragility.
Nevertheless, José Arcadio could not respond to her because they were in a kind of public tent
where the gypsies passed through with their circus things and did their business, and would even
tarry by the bed for a game of dice. The lamp hanging from the center pole lighted the whole place
up. During a pause in the caresses, José Arcadio stretched out naked on the bed without knowing
what to do, while the girl tried to inspire him. A gypsy woman with splendid flesh came in a short
time after accompanied by a man who was not of the caravan but who was not from the village
either, and they both began to undress in front of the bed. Without meaning to, the woman looked
at José Arcadio and examined his magnificent animal in repose with a kind of pathetic fervor.

“My boy,” she exclaimed, “may God preserve you just as you are.”

José Arcadio’s companion asked them to leave them alone, and the couple lay down on the
ground, close to the bed. The passion of the others woke up José Arcadio’s fervor. On the first
contact the bones of the girl seemed to become disjointed with a disorderly crunch like the sound of
a box of dominoes, and her skin broke out into a pale sweat and her eyes filled with tears as her
whole body exhaled a lugubrious lament and a vague smell of mud. But she bore the impact with a
firmness of character and a bravery that were admirable. José Arcadio felt himself lifted up into the


air toward a state of seraphic inspiration, where his heart burst forth with an outpouring of tender
obscenities that entered the girl through her ears and came out of her mouth translated into her
language. It was Thursday. On Saturday night, José Arcadio wrapped a red cloth around his head
and left with the gypsies.

When Úrsula discovered his absence she searched for him all through the village. In the remains
of the gypsy camp there was nothing but a garbage pit among the still smoking ashes of the
extinguished campfires. Someone who was there looking for beads among the trash told Úrsula that
the night before he had seen her son in the tumult of the caravan pushing the snake-man’s cage on a
cart. “He’s become a gypsy” she shouted to her husband, who had not shown the slightest sign of
alarm over the disappearance.

“I hope it’s true,” José Arcadio Buendía said, grinding in his mortar the material that had been
ground a thousand times and reheated and ground again. “That way he’ll learn to be a man.” Úrsula
asked where the gypsies had gone. She went along asking and following the road she had been
shown, thinking that she still had time to catch up to them. She kept getting farther away from the
village until she felt so far away that she did not think about returning. José Arcadio Buendía did not
discover that his wife was missing until eight o’clock at night, when he left the material warming in a
bed of manure and went to see what was wrong with little Amaranta, who was getting hoarse from
crying. In a few hours he gathered a group of well-equipped men, put Amaranta in the hands of a
woman who offered to nurse her, and was lost on invisible paths in pursuit of Úrsula. Aureliano
went with them. Some Indian fishermen, whose language they could not understand, told them with
signs that they had not seen anyone pass. After three days of useless searching they returned to the
village.

For several weeks José Arcadio Buendía let himself be overcome by consternation. He took care
of little Amaranta like a mother. He bathed and dressed her, took her to be nursed four times a day,
and even sang to her at night the songs that Úrsula never knew how to sing. On a certain occasion
Pilar Ternera volunteered to do the household chores until Úrsula came back. Aureliano, whose
mysterious intuition had become sharpened with the misfortune, felt a glow of clairvoyance when he
saw her come in. Then he knew that in some inexplicable way she was to blame for his brother’s
flight and the consequent disappearance of his mother, and he harassed her with a silent and
implacable hostility in such a way that the woman did not return to the house.

Time put things in their place. José Arcadio Buendía and his son did not know exactly when they
returned to the laboratory, dusting things, lighting the water pipe, involved once more in the patient
manipulation of the material that had been sleeping for several months in its bed of manure. Even
Amaranta, lying in a wicker basket, observed with curiosity the absorbing work of her father and her
brother in the small room where the air was rarefied by mercury vapors. On a certain occasion,
months after Úrsula’s departure, strange things began to happen. An empty flask that had been
forgotten in a cupboard for a long time became so heavy that it could not be moved. A pan of water
on the worktable boiled without any fire under it for a half hour until it completely evaporated. José
Arcadio Buendía and his son observed those phenomena with startled excitement, unable to explain
them but interpreting them as predictions of the material. One day Amaranta’s basket began to
move by itself and made a complete turn about the room, to the consternation of Auerliano, who
hurried to stop it. But his father did not get upset. He put the basket in its place and tied it to the leg
of a table, convinced that the long-awaited event was imminent. It was on that occasion that
Auerliano heard him say:

“If you don’t fear God, fear him through the metals.

Suddenly, almost five months after her disappearance, Úrsula came back. She arrived exalted,
rejuvenated, with new clothes in a style that was unknown in the village. José Arcadio Buendía could
barely stand up under the impact. “That was it!” he shouted. “I knew it was going to happen.” And


he really believed it, for during his prolonged imprisonment as he manipulated the material, he
begged in the depth of his heart that the longed-for miracle should not be the discovery of the
philosopher’s stone, or the freeing of the breath that makes metals live, or the faculty to convert the
hinges and the locks of the house into gold, but what had just happened: Úrsula’s return. But she did
not share his excitement. She gave him a conventional kiss, as if she had been away only an hour,
and she told him:

“Look out the door.”

José Arcadio Buendía took a long time to get out of his perplexity when he went out into the
street and saw the crowd. They were not gypsies. They were men and women like them, with
straight hair and dark skin, who spoke the same language and complained of the same pains. They
had mules loaded down with things to eat, oxcarts with furniture and domestic utensils, pure and
simple earthly accessories put on sale without any fuss by peddlers of everyday reality. They came
from the other side of the swamp, only two days away, where there were towns that received mail
every month in the year and where they were familiar with the implements of good living. Úrsula
had not caught up with the gypsies, but she had found the route that her husband had been unable
to discover in his frustrated search for the great inventions.


Chapter 3

PILAR TERNERA’S son was brought to his grand parents’ house two weeks after he was born. Úrsula
admitted him grudgingly, conquered once more by the obstinacy of her husband, who could not
tolerate the idea that an offshoot of his blood should be adrift, but he imposed the condition that
the child should never know his true identity. Although he was given the name José Arcadio, they
ended up calling him simply Arcadio so as to avoid confusion. At that time there was so much
activity in the town and so much bustle in the house that the care of the children was relegated to a
secondary level. They were put in the care of Visitación, a Guajiro Indian woman who had arrived in
town with a brother in flight from a plague of insomnia that had been scourging their tribe for
several years. They were both so docile and willing to help that Úrsula took them on to help her
with her household chores. That was how Arcadio and Amaranta came to speak the Guajiro
language before Spanish, and they learned to drink lizard broth and eat spider eggs without Úrsula’s
knowing it, for she was too busy with a promising business in candy animals. Macondo had changed.
The people who had come with Úrsula spread the news of the good quality of its soil and its
privileged position with respect to the swamp, so that from the narrow village of past times it
changed into an active town with stores and workshops and a permanent commercial route over
which the first Arabs arrived with their baggy pants and rings in their ears, swapping glass beads for
macaws. José Arcadio Buendía did not have a moment’s rest. Fascinated by an immediate reality that
came to be more fantastic than the vast universe of his imagination, he lost all interest in the
alchemist’s laboratory, put to rest the material that had become attenuated with months of
manipulation, and went back to being the enterprising man of earlier days when he had decided
upon the layout of the streets and the location of the new houses so that no one would enjoy
privileges that everyone did not have. He acquired such authority among the new arrivals that
foundations were not laid or walls built without his being consulted, and it was decided that he
should be the one in charge of the distribution of the land. When the acrobat gypsies returned, with
their vagabond carnival transformed now into a gigantic organization of games of luck and chance,
they were received with great joy, for it was thought that José Arcadio would be coming back with
them. But José Arcadio did not return, nor did they come with the snake-man, who, according to
what Úrsula thought, was the only one who could tell them about their son, so the gypsies were not
allowed to camp in town or set foot in it in the future, for they were considered the bearers of
concupiscence and perversion. José Arcadio Buendía, however, was explicit in maintaining that the
old tribe of Melquíades, who had contributed so much to the growth of the village with his age-old
wisdom and his fabulous inventions, would always find the gates open. But Melquíades’ tribe,
according to what the wanderers said, had been wiped off the face of the earth because they had
gone beyond the limits of human knowledge.

Emancipated for the moment at least from the torment of fantasy, José Arcadio Buendía in a
short time set up a system of order and work which allowed for only one bit of license: the freeing
of the birds, which, since the time of the founding, had made time merry with their flutes, and
installing in their place musical clocks in every house. They were wondrous clocks made of carved
wood, which the Arabs had traded for macaws and which José Arcadio Buendía had synchronized
with such precision that every half hour the town grew merry with the progressive chords of the
same song until it reached the climax of a noontime that was as exact and unanimous as a complete
waltz. It was also José Arcadio Buendía who decided during those years that they should plant
almond trees instead of acacias on the streets, and who discovered, without ever revealing it, a way
to make them live forever. Many years later, when Macondo was a field of wooden houses with zinc


roofs, the broken and dusty almond trees still stood on the oldest streets, although no one knew
who had planted them. While his father was putting the town in order and his mother was increasing
their wealth with her marvelous business of candied little roosters and fish, which left the house
twice a day strung along sticks of balsa wood, Aureliano spent interminable hours in the abandoned
laboratory, learning the art of silverwork by his own experimentation. He had shot up so fast that in
a short time the clothing left behind by his brother no longer fit him and he began to wear his
father’s, but Visitación had to sew pleats in the shirt and darts in the pants, because Aureliano had
not sequined the corpulence of the others. Adolescence had taken away the softness of his voice and
had made him silent and definitely solitary, but, on the other hand, it had restored the intense
expression that he had had in his eyes when he was born. He concentrated so much on his
experiments in silverwork that he scarcely left the laboratory to eat. Worried ever his inner
withdrawal, José Arcadio Buendía gave him the keys to the house and a little money, thinking that
perhaps he needed a woman. But Aureliano spent the money on muriatic acid to prepare some aqua
regia and he beautified the keys by plating them with gold. His excesses were hardly comparable to
those of Arcadio and Amaranta, who had already begun to get their second teeth and still went
about all day clutching at the Indians’ cloaks, stubborn in their decision not to speak Spanish but the
Guajiro language. “You shouldn’t complain.” Úrsula told her husband. “Children inherit their
parents’ madness.” And as she was lamenting her misfortune, convinced that the wild behavior of
her children was something as fearful as a pig’s tail, Aureliano gave her a look that wrapped her in an
atmosphere of uncertainty.

“Somebody is coming,” he told her.

Úrsula, as she did whenever he made a prediction, tried to break it down with her housewifely
logic. It was normal for someone to be coming. Dozens of strangers came through Macondo every
day without arousing suspicion or secret ideas. Nevertheless, beyond all logic, Aureliano was sure of
his prediction.

“I don’t know who it will be,” he insisted, “but whoever it is is already on the way.”

That Sunday, in fact, Rebeca arrived. She was only eleven years old. She had made the difficult
trip from Manaure with some hide dealers who had taken on the task of delivering her along with a
letter to José Arcadio Buendía, but they could not explain precisely who the person was who had
asked the favor. Her entire baggage consisted of a small trunk, a little rocking chair with small hand-
painted flowers, and a canvas sack which kept making a cloc-cloc-cloc sound, where she carried her
parents’ bones. The letter addressed to José Arcadio Buendía was written is very warm terms by
someone who still loved him very much in spite of time and distance, and who felt obliged by a
basic humanitarian feeling to do the charitable thing and send him that poor unsheltered orphan,
who was a second cousin of Úrsula’s and consequently also a relative of José Arcadio Buendía,
although farther removed, because she was the daughter of that unforgettable friend Nicanor Ulloa
and his very worthy wife Rebeca Montiel, may God keep them in His holy kingdom, whose remains
the girl was carrying so that they might be given Christian burial. The names mentioned, as well as
the signature on the letter, were perfectly legible, but neither José Arcadio, Buendía nor Úrsula
remembered having any relatives with those names, nor did they know anyone by the name of the
sender of the letter, much less the remote village of Manaure. It was impossible to obtain any further
information from the girl. From the moment she arrived she had been sitting in the rocker, sucking
her finger and observing everyone with her large, startled eyes without giving any sign of
understanding what they were asking her. She wore a diagonally striped dress that had been dyed
black, worn by use, and a pair of scaly patent leather boots. Her hair was held behind her ears with
bows of black ribbon. She wore a scapular with the images worn away by sweat, and on her right
wrist the fang of a carnivorous animal mounted on a backing of copper as an amulet against the evil
eye. Her greenish skin, her stomach, round and tense as a drum. revealed poor health and hunger


that were older than she was, but when they gave her something to eat she kept the plate on her
knees without tasting anything. They even began to think that she was a deaf-mute until the Indians
asked her in their language if she wanted some water and she moved her eyes as if she recognized
them and said yes with her head.

They kept her, because there was nothing else they could do. They decided to call her Rebeca,
which according to the letter was her mother’s name, because Aureliano had the patience to read to
her the names of all the saints and he did not get a reaction from any one of them. Since there was
no cemetery in Macondo at that time, for no one had died up till then, they kept the bag of bones to
wait for a worthy place of burial, and for a long time it got in the way everywhere and would be
found where least expected, always with its clucking of a broody hen. A long time passed before
Rebeca became incorporated into the life of the family. She would sit in her small rocker sucking her
finger in the most remote corner of the house. Nothing attracted her attention except the music of
the clocks, which she would look for every half hour with her frightened eyes as if she hoped to find
it someplace in the air. They could not get her to eat for several days. No one understood why she
had not died of hunger until the Indians, who were aware of everything, for they went ceaselessly
about the house on their stealthy feet, discovered that Rebeca only liked to eat the damp earth of the
courtyard and the cake of whitewash that she picked of the walls with her nails. It was obvious that
her parents, or whoever had raised her, had scolded her for that habit because she did it secretively
and with a feeling of guilt, trying to put away supplies so that she could eat when no one was
looking. From then on they put her under an implacable watch. They threw cow gall onto the
courtyard and, rubbed hot chili on the walls, thinking they could defeat her pernicious vice with
those methods, but she showed such signs of astuteness and ingenuity to find some earth that
Úrsula found herself forced to use more drastic methods. She put some orange juice and rhubarb
into a pan that she left in the dew all night and she gave her the dose the following day on an empty
stomach. Although no one had told her that it was the specific remedy for the vice of eating earth,
she thought that any bitter substance in an empty stomach would have to make the liver react.
Rebeca was so rebellious and strong in spite of her frailness that they had to tie her up like a calf to
make her swallow the medicine, and they could barely keep back her kicks or bear up under the
strange hieroglyphics that she alternated with her bites and spitting, and that, according to what the
scandalized Indians said, were the vilest obscenities that one could ever imagine in their language.
When Úrsula discovered that, she added whipping to the treatment. It was never established
whether it was the rhubarb or the beatings that had effect, or both of them together, but the truth
was that in a few weeks Rebeca began to show signs of recovery. She took part in the games of
Arcadio and Amaranta, who treated her like an older sister, and she ate heartily, using the utensils
properly. It was soon revealed that she spoke Spanish with as much fluency as the Indian language,
that she had a remarkable ability for manual work, and that she could sing the waltz of the clocks
with some very funny words that she herself had invented. It did not take long for them to consider
her another member of the family. She was more affectionate to Úrsula than any of her own
children had been, and she called Arcadio, and Amaranta brother and sister, Aureliano uncle, and
José Arcadio Buendía grandpa. So that she finally deserved, as much as the others, the name of
Rebeca Buendía, the only one that she ever had and that she bore with dignity until her death.

One night about the time that Rebeca was cured of the vice of eating earth and was brought to
sleep in the other children’s room, the Indian woman, who slept with them awoke by chance and
heard a strange, intermittent sound in the corner. She got up in alarm, thinking that an animal had
come into the room, and then she saw Rebeca in the rocker, sucking her finger and with her eyes
lighted up in the darkness like those of a cat. Terrified, exhausted by her fate, Visitación recognized
in those eyes the symptoms of the sickness whose threat had obliged her and her brother to exile


themselves forever from an age-old kingdom where they had been prince and princess. It was the
insomnia plague.

Cataure, the Indian, was gone from the house by morning. His sister stayed because her fatalistic
heart told her that the lethal sickness would follow her, no matter what, to the farthest corner of the
earth. No one understood Visitación’s alarm. “If we don’t ever sleep again, so much the better,” José
Arcadio Buendía said in good humor. “That way we can get more out of life.” But the Indian
woman explained that the most fearsome part of the sickness of insomnia was not the impossibility
of sleeping, for the body did not feel any fatigue at all, but its inexorable evolution toward a more
critical manifestation: a loss of memory. She meant that when the sick person became used to his
state of vigil, the recollection of his childhood began to be erased from his memory, then the name
and notion of things, and finally the identity of people and even the awareness of his own being,
until he sank into a kind of idiocy that had no past. José Arcadio Buendía, dying with laughter,
thought that it was just a question of one of the many illnesses invented by the Indians’ supersti-
tions. But Úrsula, just to be safe, took the precaution of isolating Rebeca from the other children.

After several weeks, when Visitación’s terror seemed to have died down, José Arcadio Buendía
found himself rolling over in bed, unable to fall asleep. Úrsula, who had also awakened, asked him
what was wrong, and he answered: “I’m thinking about Prudencio Aguilar again.” They did not
sleep a minute, but the following day they felt so rested that they forgot about the bad night.
Aureliano commented with surprise at lunchtime that he felt very well in spite of the fact that he had
spent the whole night in the laboratory gilding a brooch that he planned to give to Úrsula for her
birthday. They did not become alarmed until the third day, when no one felt sleepy at bedtime and
they realized that they had gone more than fifty hours without sleeping.

“The children are awake too,” the Indian said with her fatalistic conviction. “Once it gets into a
house no one can escape the plague.”

They had indeed contracted the illness of insomnia. Úrsula, who had learned from her mother
the medicinal value of plants, prepared and made them all drink a brew of monkshood, but they
could not get to sleep and spent the whole day dreaming on their feet. In that state of hallucinated
lucidity, not only did they see the images of their own dreams, but some saw the images dreamed by
others. It was as if the house were full of visitors. Sitting in her rocker in a corner of the kitchen,
Rebeca dreamed that a man who looked very much like her, dressed in white linen and with his shirt
collar closed by a gold button, was bringing her a bouquet of roses. He was accompanied by a
woman with delicate hands who took out one rose and put it in the child’s hair. Úrsula understood
that the man and woman were Rebeca’s parents, but even though she made a great effort to
recognize them, she confirmed her certainty that she had never seen them. In the meantime,
through an oversight that José Arcadio Buendía never forgave himself for, the candy animals made
in the house were still being sold in the town. Children and adults sucked with delight on the
delicious little green roosters of insomnia, the exquisite pink fish of insomnia, and the tender yellow
ponies of insomnia, so that dawn on Monday found the whole town awake. No one was alarmed at
first. On the contrary, they were happy at not sleeping because there was so much to do in Macondo
in those days that there was barely enough time. They worked so hard that soon they had nothing
else to do and they could be found at three o’clock in the morning with their arms crossed, counting
the notes in the waltz of the clock. Those who wanted to sleep, not from fatigue but because of the
nostalgia for dreams, tried all kinds of methods of exhausting themselves. They would gather
together to converse endlessly, to tell over and over for hours on end the same jokes, to complicate
to the limits of exasperation the story about the capon, which was an endless game in which the
narrator asked if they wanted him to tell them the story about the capon, and when they answered
yes, the narrator would say that he had not asked them to say yes, but whether they wanted him to
tell them the story about the capon, and when they answered no, the narrator told them that he had


not asked them to say no, but whether they wanted him to tell them the story about the capon, and
when they remained silent the narrator told them that he had not asked them to remain silent but
whether they wanted him to tell them the story about the capon, and no one could leave because the
narrator would say that he had not asked them to leave but whether they wanted him to tell them
the story about the capon, and so on and on in a vicious circle that lasted entire nights.

When José Arcadio Buendía realized that the plague had invaded the town, he gathered together
the heads of families to explain to them what he knew about the sickness of insomnia, and they
agreed on methods to prevent the scourge from spreading to other towns in the swamp. That was
why they took the bells off the goats, bells that the Arabs had swapped them for macaws, and put
them at the entrance to town at the disposal of those who would not listen to the advice and
entreaties of the sentinels and insisted on visiting the town. All strangers who passed through the
streets of Macondo at that time had to ring their bells so that the sick people would know that they
were healthy. They were not allowed to eat or drink anything during their stay, for there was no
doubt but that the illness was transmitted by mouth, and all food and drink had been contaminated
by insomnia. In that way they kept the plague restricted to the perimeter of the town. So effective
was the quarantine that the day came when the emergency situation was accepted as a natural thing
and life was organized in such a way that work picked up its rhythm again and no one worried any
more about the useless habit of sleeping.

It was Aureliano who conceived the formula that was to protect them against loss of memory for
several months. He discovered it by chance. An expert insomniac, having been one of the first, he
had learned the art of silverwork to perfection. One day he was looking for the small anvil that he
used for laminating metals and he could not remember its name. His father told him: “Stake.”
Aureliano wrote the name on a piece of paper that he pasted to the base of the small anvil: stake. In
that way he was sure of not forgetting it in the future. It did not occur to him that this was the first
manifestation of a loss of memory, because the object had a difficult name to remember. But a few
days later be, discovered that he had trouble remembering almost every object in the laboratory.
Then he marked them with their respective names so that all he had to do was read the inscription
in order to identify them. When his father told him about his alarm at having forgotten even the
most impressive happenings of his childhood, Aureliano explained his method to him, and José
Arcadio Buendía put it into practice all through the house and later on imposed it on the whole
village. With an inked brush he marked everything with its name: table, chair, clock, door, wall, bed, pan.
He went to the corral and marked the animals and plants: cow, goat, pig, hen, cassava, caladium, banana.
Little by little, studying the infinite possibilities of a loss of memory, he realized that the day might
come when things would be recognized by their inscriptions but that no one would remember their
use. Then he was more explicit. The sign that he hung on the neck of the cow was an exemplary
proof of the way in which the inhabitants of Macondo were prepared to fight against loss of
memory: This is the cow. She must be milked every morning so that she will produce milk, and the milk must be
boiled in order to be mixed with coffee to make coffee and milk. Thus they went on living in a reality that was
slipping away, momentarily captured by words, but which would escape irremediably when they
forgot the values of the written letters.

At the beginning of the road into the swamp they put up a sign that said MACONDO and another
larger one on the main street that said GOD EXISTS. In all the houses keys to memorizing objects
and feelings had been written. But the system demanded so much vigilance and moral strength that
many succumbed to the spell of an imaginary reality, one invented by themselves, which was less
practical for them but more comforting. Pilar Ternera was the one who contributed most to
popularize that mystification when she conceived the trick of reading the past in cards as she had
read the future before. By means of that recourse the insomniacs began to live in a world built on
the uncertain alternatives of the cards, where a father was remembered faintly as the dark man who


had arrived at the beginning of April and a mother was remembered only as the dark woman who
wore a gold ring on her left hand, and where a birth date was reduced to the last Tuesday on which a
lark sang in the laurel tree. Defeated by those practices of consolation, José Arcadio Buendía then
decided to build the memory machine that he had desired once in order to remember the marvelous
inventions of the gypsies. The artifact was based on the possibility of reviewing every morning, from
beginning to end, the totality of knowledge acquired during one’s life. He conceived of it as a
spinning dictionary that a person placed on the axis could operate by means of a lever, so that in a
very few hours there would pass before his eyes the notions most necessary for life. He had
succeeded in writing almost fourteen thousand entries when along the road from the swamp a
strange-looking old man with the sad sleepers’ bell appeared, carrying a bulging suitcase tied with a
rope and pulling a cart covered with black cloth. He went straight to the house of José Arcadio
Buendía.

Visitación did not recognize him when she opened the door and she thought he had come with
the idea of selling something, unaware that nothing could be sold in a town that was sinking
irrevocably into the quicksand of forgetfulness. He was a decrepit man. Although his voice was also
broken by uncertainty and his hands seemed to doubt the existence of things, it was evident that he
came from the world where men could still sleep and remember. José Arcadio Buendía found him
sitting in the living room fanning himself with a patched black hat as he read with compassionate
attention the signs pasted to the walls. He greeted him with a broad show of affection, afraid that he
had known him at another time and that he did not remember him now. But the visitor was aware
of his falseness, He felt himself forgotten, not with the irremediable forgetfulness of the heart, but
with a different kind of forgetfulness, which was more cruel and irrevocable and which he knew very
well because it was the forgetfulness of death. Then he understood. He opened the suitcase
crammed with indecipherable objects and from among then he took out a little case with many
flasks. He gave José Arcadio Buendía a drink of a gentle color and the light went on in his memory.
His eyes became moist from weeping even before he noticed himself in an absurd living room
where objects were labeled and before he was ashamed of the solemn nonsense written on the walls,
and even before he recognized the newcomer with a dazzling glow of joy. It was Melquíades.

While Macondo was celebrating the recovery of its memory, José Arcadio Buendía and
Melquíades dusted off their old friendship. The gypsy was inclined to stay in the town. He really had
been through death, but he had returned because he could not bear the solitude. Repudiated by his
tribe, having lost all of his supernatural faculties because of his faithfulness to life, he decided to take
refuge in that corner of the world which had still not been discovered by death, dedicated to the
operation of a daguerreotype laboratory. José Arcadio Buendía had never heard of that invention.
But when he saw himself and his whole family fastened onto a sheet of iridescent metal for an
eternity, he was mute with stupefaction. That was the date of the oxidized daguerreotype in which
José Arcadio Buendía appeared with his bristly and graying hair, his card board collar attached to his
shirt by a copper button, and an expression of startled solemnity, whom Úrsula described, dying
with laughter, as a “frightened general.” José Arcadio Buendía was, in fact, frightened on that dear
December morning when the daguerreotype was made, for he was thinking that people were slowly
wearing away while his image would endure an a metallic plaque. Through a curious reversal of
custom, it was Úrsula who got that idea out of his head, as it was also she who forgot her ancient
bitterness and decided that Melquíades would stay on in the house, although she never permitted
them to make a daguerreotype of her because (according to her very words) she did not want to
survive as a laughingstock for her grandchildren. That morning she dressed the children in their best
clothes, powdered their faces, and gave a spoonful of marrow syrup to each one so that they would
all remain absolutely motionless during the nearly two minutes in front of Melquíades fantastic
camera. In the family daguerreotype, the only one that ever existed, Aureliano appeared dressed in


black velvet between Amaranta and Rebeca. He had the same languor and the same clairvoyant look
that he would have years later as he faced the firing squad. But he still had not sensed the
premonition of his fate. He was an expert silversmith, praised all over the swampland for the
delicacy of his work. In the workshop, which he shared with Melquíades’ mad laboratory, he could
barely be heard breathing. He seemed to be taking refuge in some other time, while his father and
the gypsy with shouts interpreted the predictions of Nostradamus amidst a noise of flasks and trays
and the disaster of spilled acids and silver bromide that was lost in the twists and turns it gave at
every instant. That dedication to his work, the good judgment with which he directed his attention,
had allowed Aureliano to earn in a short time more money than Úrsula had with her delicious candy
fauna, but everybody thought it strange that he was now a full-grown man and had not known a
woman. It was true that he had never had one.

Several months later saw the return of Francisco the Man, as ancient vagabond who was almost
two hundred years old and who frequently passed through Macondo distributing songs that he
composed himself. In them Francisco the Man told in great detail the things that had happened in
the towns along his route, from Manaure to the edge of the swamp, so that if anyone had a message
to send or an event to make public, he would pay him two cents to include it in his repertory. That
was how Úrsula learned of the death of her mother, as a simple consequence of listening to the
songs in the hope that they would say something about her son José Arcadio. Francisco the Man,
called that because he had once defeated the devil in a duel of improvisation, and whose real name
no one knew, disappeared from Macondo during the insomnia plague and one night he appeared
suddenly in Catarino’s store. The whole town went to listen to him to find out what had happened
in the world. On that occasion there arrived with him a woman who was so fat that four Indians had
to carry her in a rocking chair, and an adolescent mulatto girl with a forlorn look who protected her
from the sun with an umbrella. Aureliano went to Catarino’s store that night. He found Francisco
the Man, like a monolithic chameleon, sitting in the midst of a circle of bystanders. He was singing
the news with his old, out-of-tune voice, accompanying himself with the same archaic accordion that
Sir Walter Raleigh had given him in the Guianas and keeping time with his great walking feet that
were cracked from saltpeter. In front of a door at the rear through which men were going and
coming, the matron of the rocking chair was sitting and fanning herself in silence. Catarino, with a
felt rose behind his ear, was selling the gathering mugs of fermented cane juice, and he took
advantage of the occasion to go over to the men and put his hand on them where he should not
have. Toward midnight the heat was unbearable. Aureliano listened to the news to the end without
hearing anything that was of interest to his family. He was getting ready to go home when the
matron signaled him with her hand.

“You go in too.” she told him. “It only costs twenty cents.”

Aureliano threw a coin into the hopper that the matron had in her lap and went into the room
without knowing why. The adolescent mulatto girl, with her small bitch’s teats, was naked on the
bed. Before Aureliano sixty-three men had passed through the room that night. From being used so
much, kneaded with sweat and sighs, the air in the room had begun to turn to mud. The girl took
off the soaked sheet and asked Aureliano to hold it by one side. It was as heavy as a piece of canvas.
They squeezed it, twisting it at the ends until it regained its natural weight. They turned over the mat
and the sweat came out of the other side. Aureliano was anxious for that operation never to end. He
knew the theoretical mechanics of love, but he could not stay on his feet because of the weakness of
his knees, and although he had goose pimples on his burning skin he could not resist the urgent
need to expel the weight of his bowels. When the girl finished fixing up the bed and told him to get
undressed, he gave her a confused explanation: “They made me come in. They told me to throw
twenty cents into the hopper and hurry up.” The girl understood his confusion. “If you throw in
twenty cents more when you go out, you can stay a little longer,” she said softly. Aureliano got


undressed, tormented by shame, unable to get rid of the idea that-his nakedness could not stand
comparison with that of his brother. In spite of the girl’s efforts he felt more and more indifferent
and terribly alone. “I’ll throw in other twenty cents,” he said with a desolate voice. The girl thanked
him in silence. Her back was raw. Her skin was stuck to her ribs and her breathing was forced
because of an immeasurable exhaustion. Two years before, far away from there, she had fallen asleep
without putting out the candle and had awakened surrounded by flames. The house where she lived
with the grandmother who had raised her was reduced to ashes. Since then her grandmother carried
her from town to town, putting her to bed for twenty cents in order to make up the value of the
burned house. According to the girl’s calculations, she still had ten years of seventy men per night,
because she also had to pay the expenses of the trip and food for both of them as well as the pay of
the Indians who carried the rocking chair. When the matron knocked on the door the second time,
Aureliano left the room without having done anything, troubled by a desire to weep. That night he
could not sleep, thinking about the girl, with a mixture of desire and pity. He felt an irresistible need
to love her and protect her. At dawn, worn out by insomnia and fever, he made the calm decision to
marry her in order to free her from the despotism of her grandmother and to enjoy all the nights of
satisfaction that she would give the seventy men. But at ten o’clock in the morning, when he reached
Catarino’s store, the girl had left town.

Time mitigated his mad proposal, but it aggravated his feelings of frustration. He took refuge in
work. He resigned himself to being a womanless man for all his life in order to hide the shame of his
uselessness. In the meantime, Melquíades had printed on his plates everything that was printable in
Macondo, and he left the daguerreotype laboratory to the fantasies of José Arcadio Buendía who
had resolved to use it to obtain scientific proof of the existence of God. Through a complicated
process of superimposed exposures taken in different parts of the house, he was sure that sooner or
later he would get a daguerreotype of God, if He existed, or put an end once and for all to the
supposition of His existence. Melquíades got deeper into his interpretations of Nostradamus. He
would stay up until very late, suffocating in his faded velvet vest, scribbling with his tiny sparrow
hands, whose rings had lost the glow of former times. One night he thought he had found a
prediction of the future of Macondo. It was to be a luminous city with great glass houses where
there was no trace remaining of the race of the Buendía. “It’s a mistake,” José Arcadio Buendía
thundered. “They won’t be houses of glass but of ice, as I dreamed, and there will always be a
Buendía, per omnia secula seculorum.” Úrsula fought to preserve common sense in that extravagant
house, having broadened her business of little candy animals with an oven that went all night turning
out baskets and more baskets of bread and a prodigious variety of puddings, meringues, and cookies,
which disappeared in a few hours on the roads winding through the swamp. She had reached an age
where she had a right to rest, but she was nonetheless more and more active. So busy was she in her
prosperous enterprises that one afternoon she looked distractedly toward the courtyard while the
Indian woman helped her sweeten the dough and she saw two unknown and beautiful adolescent
girls doing frame embroidery in the light of the sunset. They were Rebeca and Amaranta. As soon as
they had taken off the mourning clothes for their grandmother, which they wore with inflexible
rigor for three years, their bright clothes seemed to have given them a new place in the world.
Rebeca, contrary to what might have been expected, was the more beautiful. She had a light
complexion, large and peaceful eyes, and magical hands that seemed to work out the design of the
embroidery with invisible threads. Amaranta, the younger, was somewhat graceless, but she had the
natural distinction, the inner tightness of her dead grandmother. Next to them, although he was
already revealing the physical drive of his father, Arcadio looked like a child. He set about learning
the art of silverwork with Aureliano, who had also taught him how to read and write. Úrsula
suddenly realized that the house had become full of people, that her children were on the point of
marrying and having children, and that they would be obliged to scatter for lack of space. Then she


took out the money she had accumulated over long years of hard labor, made some arrangements
with her customers, and undertook the enlargement of the house. She had a formal parlor for visits
built, another one that was more comfortable and cool for daily use, a dining room with a table with
twelve places where the family could sit with all of their guests, nine bedrooms with windows on the
courtyard and a long porch protected from the heat of noon by a rose garden with a railing on
which to place pots of ferns and begonias. She had the kitchen enlarged to hold two ovens. The
granary where Pilar Ternera had read José Arcadio’s future was torn down and another twice as large
built so that there would never be a lack of food in the house. She had baths built is the courtyard in
the shade of the chestnut tree, one for the women and another for the men, and in the rear a large
stable, a fenced-in chicken yard, a shed for the milk cows, and an aviary open to the four winds so
that wandering birds could roost there at their pleasure. Followed by dozens of masons and
carpenters, as if she had contracted her husband’s hallucinating fever, Úrsula fixed the position of
light and heat and distributed space without the least sense of its limitations. The primitive building
of the founders became filled with tools and materials, of workmen exhausted by sweat, who asked
everybody please not to molest them, exasperated by the sack of bones that followed them
everywhere with its dull rattle. In that discomfort, breathing quicklime and tar, no one could see very
well how from the bowels of the earth there was rising not only the largest house is the town, but
the most hospitable and cool house that had ever existed in the region of the swamp. José Buendía,
trying to surprise Divine Providence in the midst of the cataclysm, was the one who least
understood it. The new house was almost finished when Úrsula drew him out of his chimerical
world in order to inform him that she had an order to paint the front blue and not white as they had
wanted. She showed him the official document. José Arcadio Buendía, without understanding what
his wife was talking about, deciphered the signature.

“Who is this fellow?” he asked:

“The magistrate,” Úrsula answered disconsolately. They say he’s an authority sent by the
government.”

Don Apolinar Moscote, the magistrate, had arrived in Macondo very quietly. He put up at the
Hotel Jacob—built by one of the first Arabs who came to swap knickknacks for macaws—and on
the following day he rented a small room with a door on the street two blocks away from the
Buendía house. He set up a table and a chair that he had bought from Jacob, nailed up on the wall
the shield of the republic that he had brought with him, and on the door he painted the sign:
Magistrate. His first order was for all the houses to be painted blue in celebration of the anniversary
of national independence. José Arcadio Buendía, with the copy of the order in his hand, found him
taking his nap in a hammock he had set up in the narrow office. “Did you write this paper?” he
asked him. Don Apolinar Moscote, a mature man, timid, with a ruddy complexion, said yes. “By
what right?” José Arcadio Buendía asked again. Don Apolinar Moscote picked up a paper from the
drawer of the table and showed it to him. “I have been named magistrate of this town.” José
Arcadio Buendía did not even look at the appointment.

“In this town we do not give orders with pieces of paper,” he said without losing his calm. “And
so that you know it once and for all, we don’t need any judge here because there’s nothing that
needs judging.”

Facing Don Apolinar Moscote, still without raising his voice, he gave a detailed account of how
they had founded the village, of how they had distributed the land, opened the roads, and
introduced the improvements that necessity required without having bothered the government and
without anyone having bothered them. “We are so peaceful that none of us has died even of a
natural death,” he said. “You can see that we still don’t have any cemetery.” No once was upset that
the government had not helped them. On the contrary, they were happy that up until then it had let
them grow in peace, and he hoped that it would continue leaving them that way, because they had


not founded a town so that the first upstart who came along would tell them what to do. Don
Apolinar had put on his denim jacket, white like his trousers, without losing at any moment the
elegance of his gestures.

“So that if you want to stay here like any other ordinary citizen, you’re quite welcome,” José
Arcadio Buendía concluded. “But if you’ve come to cause disorder by making the people paint their
houses blue, you can pick up your junk and go back where you came from. Because my house is
going to be white, white, like a dove.”

Don Apolinar Moscote turned pale. He took a step backward and tightened his jaws as he said
with a certain affliction:

“I must warn you that I’m armed.”

José Arcadio Buendía did not know exactly when his hands regained the useful strength with
which he used to pull down horses. He grabbed Don Apolinar Moscote by the lapels and lifted him
up to the level of his eyes.

“I’m doing this,” he said, “because I would rather carry you around alive and not have to keep
carrying you around dead for the rest of my life.”

In that way he carried him through the middle of the street, suspended by the lapels, until he put
him down on his two feet on the swamp road. A week later he was back with six barefoot and
ragged soldiers, armed with shotguns, and an oxcart in which his wife and seven daughters were
traveling. Two other carts arrived later with the furniture, the baggage, and the household utensils.
He settled his family in the Hotel Jacob, while he looked for a house, and he went back to open his
office under the protection of the soldiers. The founders of Macondo, resolving to expel the
invaders, went with their older sons to put themselves at the disposal of José Arcadio Buendía. But
he was against it, as he explained, because it was not manly to make trouble for someone in front of
his family, and Don Apolinar had returned with his wife and daughters. So he decided to resolve the
situation in a pleasant way.

Aureliano went with him. About that time he had begun to cultivate the black mustache with
waxed tips and the somewhat stentorian voice that would characterize him in the war. Unarmed,
without paying any attention to the guards, they went into the magistrate’s office. Don Apolinar
Moscote did not lose his calm. He introduced them to two of his daughters who happened to be
there: Amparo, sixteen, dark like her mother, and Remedios, only nine, a pretty little girl with lily-
colored skin and green eyes. They were gracious and well-mannered. As soon as the men came in,
before being introduced, they gave them chairs to sit on. But they both remained standing.

“Very well, my friend,” José Arcadio Buendía said, “you may stay here, not because you have
those bandits with shotguns at the door, but out of consideration for your wife and daughters.”

Don Apolinar Moscote was upset, but José Arcadio Buendía did not give him time to reply. “We
only make two conditions,” he went on. “The first: that everyone can paint his house the color he
feels like. The second: that the soldiers leave at once. We will guarantee order for you.” The
magistrate raised his right hand with all the fingers extended.

“Your word of honor?”

“The word of your enemy,” José Arcadio Buendía said. And he added in a bitter tone: “Because I
must tell you one thing: you and I are still enemies.”

The soldiers left that same afternoon. A few days later José Arcadio Buendía found a house for
the magistrate’s family. Everybody was at peace except Aureliano. The image of Remedios, the
magistrate’s younger daughter, who, because of her age, could have been his daughter, kept paining
him in some part of his body. It was a physical sensation that almost bothered him when he walked,
like a pebble in his shoe.


Chapter 4

THE NEW HOUSE, white, like a dove, was inaugurated with a dance. Úrsula had got that idea from
the afternoon when she saw Rebeca and Amaranta changed into adolescents, and it could almost
have been said that the main reason behind the construction was a desire to have a proper place for
the girls to receive visitors. In order that nothing would be lacking in splendor she worked like a
galley slave as the repairs were under way, so that before they were finished she had ordered costly
necessities for the decorations, the table service, and the marvelous invention that was to arouse the
astonishment of the town and the jubilation of the young people: the pianola. They delivered it
broken down, packed in several boxes that were unloaded along with the Viennese furniture, the
Bohemian crystal, the table service from the Indies Company, the tablecloths from Holland, and a
rich variety of lamps and candlesticks, hangings and drapes. The import house sent along at its own
expense an Italian expert, Pietro Crespi, to assemble and tune the pianola, to instruct the purchasers
in its functioning, and to teach them how to dance the latest music printed on its six paper rolls.

Pietro Crespi was young and blond, the most handsome and well mannered man who had ever
been seen in Macondo, so scrupulous in his dress that in spite of the suffocating heat he would work
in his brocade vest and heavy coat of dark cloth. Soaked in sweat, keeping a reverent distance from
the owners of the house, he spent several weeks shut up is the parlor with a dedication much like
that of Aureliano in his silverwork. One morning, without opening the door, without calling anyone
to witness the miracle, he placed the first roll in the pianola and the tormenting hammering and the
constant noise of wooden lathings ceased in a silence that was startled at the order and neatness of
the music. They all ran to the parlor. José Arcadio Buendía was as if struck by lightning, not because
of the beauty of the melody, but because of the automatic working of the keys of the pianola, and he
set up Melquíades’ camera with the hope of getting a daguerreotype of the invisible player. That day
the Italian had lunch with them. Rebeca and Amaranta, serving the table, were intimidated by the
way in which the angelic man with pale and ringless hands manipulated the utensils. In the living
room, next to the parlor, Pietro Crespi taught them how to dance. He showed them the steps
without touching them, keeping time with a metronome, under the friendly eye of Úrsula, who did
not leave the room for a moment while her daughters had their lesson. Pietro Crespi wore special
pants on those days, very elastic and tight, and dancing slippers, “You don’t have to worry so
much,” José Arcadio Buendía told her. “The man’s a fairy.” But she did not leave off her vigilance
until the apprenticeship was over and the Italian left Macondo. Then they began to organize the
party. Úrsula drew up a strict guest list, in which the only ones invited were the descendants of the
founders, except for the family of Pilar Ternera, who by then had had two more children by
unknown fathers. It was truly a high-class list, except that it was determined by feelings of
friendship, for those favored were not only the oldest friends of José Arcadio Buendía’s house since
before they undertook the exodus and the founding of Macondo, but also their sons and grandsons,
who were the constant companions of Aureliano and Arcadio since infancy, and their daughters,
who were the only ones who visited the house to embroider with Rebeca and Amaranta. Don
Apolinar Moscote, the benevolent ruler whose activity had been reduced to the maintenance from
his scanty resources of two policemen armed with wooden clubs, was a figurehead. In older to
support the household expenses his daughters had opened a sewing shop, where they made felt
flowers as well as guava delicacies, and wrote love notes to order. But in spite of being modest and
hard-working, the most beautiful girls in Iowa, and the most skilled at the new dances, they did not
manage to be considered for the party.


While Úrsula and the girls unpacked furniture, polished silverware, and hung pictures of maidens
in boats full of roses, which gave a breath of new life to the naked areas that the masons had built,
José Arcadio Buendía stopped his pursuit of the image of God, convinced of His nonexistence, and
he took the pianola apart in order to decipher its magical secret. Two days before the party,
swamped in a shower of leftover keys and hammers, bungling in the midst of a mix-up of strings
that would unroll in one direction and roll up again in the other, he succeeded in a fashion in putting
the instrument back together. There had never been as many surprises and as much dashing about as
in those days, but the new pitch lamps were lighted on the designated day and hour. The house was
opened, still smelling of resin and damp whitewash, and the children and grandchildren of the
founders saw the porch with ferns and begonias, the quiet rooms, the garden saturated with the
fragrance of the roses, and they gathered together in the parlor, facing the unknown invention that
had been covered with a white sheet. Those who were familiar with the piano, popular in other
towns in the swamp, felt a little disheartened, but more bitter was Úrsula’s disappointment when she
put in the first roll so that Amaranta and Rebeca could begin the dancing and the mechanism did
not work. Melquíades, almost blind by then, crumbling with decrepitude, used the arts of his
timeless wisdom in an attempt to fix it. Finally José Arcadio Buendía managed, by mistake, to move
a device that was stuck and the music came out, first in a burst and then in a flow of mixed-up
notes. Beating against the strings that had been put in without order or concert and had been tuned
with temerity, the hammers let go. But the stubborn descendants of the twenty-one intrepid people
who plowed through the mountains in search of the sea to the west avoided the reefs of the melodic
mix-up and the dancing went on until dawn.

Pietro Crespi came back to repair the pianola. Rebeca and Amaranta helped him put the strings
in order and helped him with their laughter at the mix-up of the melodies. It was extremely pleasant
and so chaste in its way that Úrsula ceased her vigilance. On the eve of his departure a farewell
dance for him was improvised with the pianola and with Rebeca he put on a skillful demonstration
of modern dance, Arcadio and Amaranta matched them in grace and skill. But the exhibition was
interrupted because Pilar Ternera, who was at the door with the onlookers, had a fight, biting and
hair pulling, with a woman who had dared to comment that Arcadio had a woman’s behind. Toward
midnight Pietro Crespi took his leave with a sentimental little speech, and he promised to return
very soon. Rebeca accompanied him to the door, and having closed up the house and put out the
lamps, she went to her room to weep. It was an inconsolable weeping that lasted for several days,
the cause of which was not known even by Amaranta. Her hermetism was not odd. Although she
seemed expansive and cordial, she had a solitary character and an impenetrable heart. She was a
splendid adolescent with long and firm bones, but she still insisted on using the small wooden
rocking chair with which she had arrived at the house, reinforced many times and with the arms
gone. No one had discovered that even at that age she still had the habit of sucking her finger. That
was why she would not lose an opportunity to lock herself in the bathroom and had acquired the
habit of sleeping with her face to the wall. On rainy afternoons, embroidering with a group of
friends on the begonia porch, she would lose the thread of the conversation and a tear of nostalgia
would salt her palate when she saw the strips of damp earth and the piles of mud that the
earthworms had pushed up in the garden. Those secret tastes, defeated in the past by oranges and
rhubarb, broke out into an irrepressible urge when she began to weep. She went back to eating
earth. The first time she did it almost out of curiosity, sure that the bad taste would be the best cure
for the temptation. And, in fact, she could not bear the earth in her mouth. But she persevered,
overcome by the growing anxiety, and little by little she was getting back her ancestral appetite, the
taste of primary minerals, the unbridled satisfaction of what was the original food. She would put
handfuls of earth in her pockets, and ate them in small bits without being seen, with a confused
feeling of pleasure and rage, as she instructed her girl friends in the most difficult needlepoint and


spoke about other men, who did not deserve the sacrifice of having one eat the whitewash on the
walls because of them. The handfuls of earth made the only man who deserved that show of
degradation less remote and more certain, as if the ground that he walked on with his fine patent
leather boots in another part of the world were transmitting to her the weight and the temperature
of his blood in a mineral savor that left a harsh aftertaste in her mouth and a sediment of peace in
her heart. One afternoon, for no reason, Amparo Moscote asked permission to see the house.
Amaranta and Rebeca, disconcerted by the unexpected visit, attended her with a stiff formality. They
showed her the remodeled mansion, they had her listen to the rolls on the pianola, and they offered
her orange marmalade and crackers. Amparo gave a lesson in dignity, personal charm, and good
manners that impressed Úrsula in the few moments that she was present during the visit. After two
hours, when the conversation was beginning to wane, Amparo took advantage of Amaranta’s
distraction and gave Rebeca a letter. She was able to see the name of the Estimable Señorita Rebeca
Buendía, written in the same methodical hand, with the same green ink, and the same delicacy of
words with which the instructions for the operation of the pianola were written, and she folded the
letter with the tips of her fingers and hid it in her bosom, looking at Amparo Moscote with an
expression of endless and unconditional gratitude and a silent promise of complicity unto death.

The sudden friendship between Amparo Moscote and Rebeca Buendía awakened the hopes of
Aureliano. The memory of little Remedios had not stopped tormenting him, but he had not found a
chance to see her. When he would stroll through town with his closest friends, Magnífico Visbal and
Gerineldo Márquez—the sons of the founders of the same names—he would look for her in the
sewing shop with an anxious glance, but he saw only the older sisters. The presence of Amparo
Moscote in the house was like a premonition. “She has to come with her,” Aureliano would say to
himself in a low voice. “She has to come.” He repeated it so many times and with such conviction
that one afternoon when he was putting together a little gold fish in the work shop, he had the
certainty that she had answered his call. Indeed, a short time later he heard the childish voice, and
when he looked up his heart froze with terror as he saw the girl at the door, dressed in pink organdy
and wearing white boots.

“You can’t go in there, Remedios, Amparo Moscote said from the hall. They’re working.”

But Aureliano did not give her time to respond. He picked up the little fish by the chain that
came through its mouth and said to her.

“Come in.”

Remedios went over and asked some questions about the fish that Aureliano could not answer
because he was seized with a sudden attack of asthma. He wanted to stay beside that lily skin
forever, beside those emerald eyes, close to that voice that called him “sir” with every question.
showing the same respect that she gave her father. Melquíades was in the corner seated at the desk
scribbling indecipherable signs. Aureliano hated him. All he could do was tell Remedios that he was
going to give her the little fish and the girl was so startled by the offer that she left the workshop as
fast as she could. That afternoon Aureliano lost the hidden patience with which he had waited for a
chance to see her. He neglected his work. In several desperate efforts of concentration he willed her
to appear but Remedios did not respond. He looked for her in her sisters’ shop, behind the window
shades in her house, in her father’s office, but he found her only in the image that saturated his
private and terrible solitude. He would spend whole hours with Rebeca in the parlor listening to the
music on the pianola. She was listening to it because it was the music with which Pietro Crespi had
taught them how to dance. Aureliano listened to it simply because everything, even music, reminded
him of Remedios.

The house became full of loves Aureliano expressed it in poetry that had no beginning or end.
He would write it on the harsh pieces of parchment that Melquíades gave him, on the bathroom
walls, on the skin of his arms, and in all of it Remedios would appear transfigured: Remedios in the


soporific air of two in the afternoon, Remedios in the soft breath of the roses, Remedios in the
water-clock secrets of the moths, Remedios in the steaming morning bread, Remedios everywhere
and Remedios forever. Rebeca waited for her love at four in the afternoon, embroidering by the
window. She knew that the mailman’s mule arrived only every two weeks, but she always waited for
him, convinced that he was going to arrive on some other day by mistake. It happened quite the
opposite: once the mule did not come on the usual day. Mad with desperation, Rebeca got up in the
middle of the night and ate handfuls of earth in the garden with a suicidal drive, weeping with pain
and fury, chewing tender earthworms and chipping her teeth on snail shells. She vomited until dawn.
She fell into a state of feverish prostration, lost consciousness, and her heart went into a shameless
delirium. Úrsula, scandalized, forced the lock on her trunk and found at the bottom, tied together
with pink ribbons, the sixteen perfumed letters and the skeletons of leaves and petals preserved in
old books and the dried butterflies that turned to powder at the touch.

Aureliano was the only one capable of understanding such desolation. That afternoon, while
Úrsula was trying to rescue Rebeca from the slough of delirium, he went with Magnífico Visbal and
Gerineldo Márquez to Catarino’s store. The establishment had been expanded with a gallery of
wooden rooms where single women who smelled of dead flowers lived. A group made up of an
accordion and drums played the songs of Francisco the Man, who had not been seen in Macondo
for several years. The three friends drank fermented cane juice. Magnífico and Gerineldo,
contemporaries of Aureliano but more skilled in the ways of the world, drank methodically with the
women seated on their laps. One of the women, withered and with goldwork on her teeth, gave
Aureliano a caress that made him shudder. He rejected her. He had discovered that the more he
drank the more he thought about Remedios, but he could bear the torture of his recollections better.
He did not know exactly when he began to float. He saw his friends and the women sailing in a
radiant glow, without weight or mass, saying words that did not come out of their mouths and
making mysterious signals that did not correspond to their expressions. Catarino put a hand on his
shoulder and said to him: “It’s going on eleven.” Aureliano turned his head, saw the enormous
disfigured face with a felt flower behind the ear, and then he lost his memory, as during the times of
forgetfulness, and he recovered it on a strange dawn and in a room that was completely foreign,
where Pilar Ternera stood in her slip, barefoot, her hair down, holding a lamp over him, startled
with disbelief.

“Aureliano!”

Aureliano checked his feet and raised his head. He did not know how he had come there, but he
knew what his aim was, because he had carried it hidden since infancy in an inviolable backwater of
his heart.

“I’ve come to sleep with you,” he said.

His clothes were smeared with mud and vomit. Pilar Ternera, who lived alone at that time with
her two younger children, did not ask him any questions. She took him to the bed. She cleaned his
face with a damp cloth, took of his clothes, and then got completely undressed and lowered the
mosquito netting so that her children would not see them if they woke up. She had become tired of
waiting for the man who would stay, of the men who left, of the countless men who missed the road
to her house, confused by the uncertainty of the cards. During the wait her skin had become
wrinkled, her breasts had withered, the coals of her heart had gone out. She felt for Aureliano in the
darkness, put her hand on his stomach and kissed him on the neck with a maternal tenderness. “My
poor child,” she murmured. Aureliano shuddered. With a calm skill, without the slightest misstep, he
left his accumulated grief behind and found Remedios changed into a swamp without horizons,
smelling of a raw animal and recently ironed clothes. When he came to the surface he was weeping.
First they were involuntary and broken sobs. Then he emptied himself out in an unleashed flow,
feeling that something swollen and painful had burst inside of him. She waited, snatching his head


with the tips of her fingers, until his body got rid of the dark material that would not let him live.
They Pilar Ternera asked him: “Who is it?” And Aureliano told her. She let out a laugh that in other
times frightened the doves and that now did not even wake up the children. “You’ll have to raise her
first,” she mocked, but underneath the mockery Aureliano found a reservoir of understanding.
When he went out of the room, leaving behind not only his doubts about his virility but also the
bitter weight that his heart had borne for so many months, Pilar Ternera made him a spontaneous
promise.

“I’m going to talk to the girl,” she told him, “and you’ll see what I’ll serve her on the tray.”

She kept her promise. But it was a bad moment, because the house had lost its peace of former
days. When she discovered Rebeca’s passion, which was impossible to keep secret because of her
shouts, Amaranta suffered an attack of fever. She also suffered from the barb of a lonely love. Shut
up in the bathroom, she would release herself from the torment of a hopeless passion by writing
feverish letters, which she finally hid in the bottom of her trunk. Úrsula barely had the strength to
take care of the two sick girls. She was unable, after prolonged and insidious interrogations, to
ascertain the causes of Amaranta’s prostration. Finally, in another moment of inspiration, she forced
the lock on the trunk and found the letters tied with a pink ribbon, swollen with fresh lilies and still
wet with tears, addressed and never sent to Pietro Crespi. Weeping with rage, she cursed the day that
it had occurred to her to buy the pianola, and she forbade the embroidery lessons and decreed a
kind of mourning with no one dead which was to be prolonged until the daughters got over their
hopes. Useless was the intervention of José Arcadio Buendía, who had modified his first impression
of Pietro Crespi and admired his ability in the manipulation of musical machines. So that when Pilar
Ternera told Aureliano that Remedios had decided on marriage, he could see that the news would
only give his parents more trouble. Invited to the parlor for a formal interview, José Arcadio
Buendía and Úrsula listened stonily to their son’s declaration. When he learned the name of the
fiancée, however, José Arcadio Buendía grew red with indignation. “Love is a disease,” he
thundered. “With so many pretty and decent girls around, the only thing that occurs to you is to get
married to the daughter of our enemy.” But Úrsula agreed with the choice. She confessed her
affection for the seven Moscote sisters. for their beauty, their ability for work, their modesty, and
their good manners, and she celebrated her son’s prudence. Conquered by his wife’s enthusiasm,
José Arcadio Buendía then laid down one condition: Rebeca, who was the one he wanted, would
marry Pietro Crespi. Úrsula would take Amaranta on a trip to the capital of the province when she
had time, so that contact with different people would alleviate her disappointment. Rebeca got her
health back just as soon as she heard of the agreement, and she wrote her fiancé a jubilant letter that
she submitted to her parents’ approval and put into the mail without the use of any intermediaries.
Amaranta pretended to accept the decision and little by little she recovered from her fevers, but she
promised herself that Rebeca would marry only over her dead body.

The following Saturday José Arcadio Buendía put on his dark suit, his celluloid collar, and the
deerskin boots that he had worn for the first time the night of the party, and went to ask for the
hand of Remedios Moscote. The magistrate and his wife received him, pleased and worried at the
same time, for they did not know the reason for the unexpected visit, and then they thought that he
was confused about the name of the intended bride. In order to remove the mistake, the mother
woke Remedios up and carried her into the living room, still drowsy from sleep. They asked her if it
was true that she had decided to get married, and she answered, whimpering, that she only wanted
them to let her sleep. José Arcadio Buendía, understanding the distress of the Moscotes, went to
clear things up with Aureliano. When he returned, the Moscotes had put on formal clothing, had
rearranged the furniture and put fresh flowers in the vases, and were waiting in the company of their
older daughters. Overwhelmed by the unpleasantness of the occasion and the bothersome hard
collar, José Arcadio Buendía confirmed the fact that Remedios, indeed, was the chosen one. “It


doesn’t make sense,” Don Apolinar Moscote said with consternation. “We have six other daughters,
all unmarried, and at an age where they deserve it, who would be delighted to be the honorable wife
of a gentleman as serious and hard-working as your son, and Aurelito lays his eyes precisely on the
one who still wets her bed.” His wife, a well-preserved woman with afflicted eyelids and expression,
scolded his mistake. When they finished the fruit punch, they willingly accepted Aureliano’s
decision. Except that Señora Moscote begged the favor of speaking to Úrsula alone. Intrigued,
protesting that they were involving her in men’s affairs, but really feeling deep emotion, Úrsula went
to visit her the next day. A half hour later she returned with the news that Remedios had not
reached puberty. Aureliano did not consider that a serious barrier. He had waited so long that he
could wait as long as was necessary until his bride reached the age of conception.

The newfound harmony was interrupted by the death of Melquíades. Although it was a
foreseeable event, the circumstances were not. A few months after his return, a process of aging had
taken place in him that was so rapid and critical that soon he was treated as one of those useless
great-grandfathers who wander about the bedrooms like shades, dragging their feet, remembering
better times aloud, and whom no one bothers about or remembers really until the morning they find
them dead in their bed. At first José Arcadio Buendía helped him in his work, enthusiastic over the
novelty of the daguerreotypes and the predictions of Nostradamus. But little by little he began
abandoning him to his solitude, for communication was becoming Increasingly difficult. He was
losing his sight and his hearing, he seemed to confuse the people he was speaking to with others he
had known in remote epochs of mankind, and he would answer questions with a complex
hodgepodge of languages. He would walk along groping in the air, although he passed between
objects with an inexplicable fluidity, as if be were endowed with some instinct of direction based on
an immediate prescience. One day he forgot to put in his false teeth, which at night he left in a glass
of water beside his bed, and he never put them in again. When Úrsula undertook the enlargement of
the house, she had them build him a special room next to Aureliano’s workshop, far from the noise
and bustle of the house, with a window flooded with light and a bookcase where she herself put in
order the books that were almost destroyed by dust and moths, the flaky stacks of paper covered
with indecipherable signs, and the glass with his false teeth, where some aquatic plants with tiny
yellow flowers had taken root. The new place seemed to please Melquíades, because he was never
seen any more, not even in the dining room, He only went to Aureliano’s workshop, where he
would spend hours on end scribbling his enigmatic literature on the parchments that he had brought
with him and that seemed to have been made out of some dry material that crumpled like puff paste.
There he ate the meals that Visitación brought him twice a day, although in the last days he lost his
appetite and fed only on vegetables. He soon acquired the forlorn look that one sees in vegetarians.
His skin became covered with a thin moss, similar to that which flourished on the antique vest that
he never took off, and his breath exhaled the odor of a sleeping animal. Aureliano ended up forget-
ting about him, absorbed in the composition of his poems, but on one occasion he thought he
understood something of what Melquíades was saying in his groping monologues, and he paid
attention. In reality, the only thing that could be isolated in the rocky paragraphs was the insistent
hammering on the word equinox, equinox, equinox, and the name of Alexander von Humboldt.
Arcadio got a little closer to him when he began to help Aureliano in his silverwork. Melquíades
answered that effort at communication at times by giving forth with phrases in Spanish that had very
little to do with reality. One afternoon, however, he seemed to be illuminated by a sudden emotion.
Years later, facing the firing squad, Arcadio would remember the trembling with which Melquíades
made him listen to several pages of his impenetrable writing, which of course he did not understand,
but which when read aloud were like encyclicals being chanted. Then he smiled for the first time in a
long while and said in Spanish: “When I die, burn mercury in my room for three days.” Arcadio told
that to José Arcadio Buendía and the latter tried to get more explicit information, but he received


only one answer: “I have found immortality.” When Melquíades’ breathing began to smell, Arcadio
took him to bathe in the river on Thursday mornings. He seemed to get better. He would undress
and get into the water with the boys, and his mysterious sense of orientation would allow him to
avoid the deep and dangerous spots. “We come from the water,” he said on a certain occasion.
Much time passed in that way without anyone’s seeing him in the house except on the night when
he made a pathetic effort to fix the pianola, and when he would go to the river with Arcadio,
carrying under his arm a gourd and a bar of palm oil soap wrapped in a towel. One Thursday before
they called him to go to the river, Aureliano heard him say: “I have died of fever on the dunes of
Singapore.” That day he went into the water at a bad spot and they did not find him until the
following day, a few miles downstream, washed up on a bright bend in the river and with a solitary
vulture sitting on his stomach. Over the scandalized protests of Úrsula, who wept with more grief
than she had had for her own father, José Arcadio Buendía was opposed to their burying him. “He
is immortal,” he said, “and he himself revealed the formula of his resurrection.” He brought out the
forgotten water pipe and put a kettle of mercury to boil next to the body, which little by little was
filling with blue bubbles. Don Apolinar Moscote ventured to remind him that an unburied drowned
man was a danger to public health. “None of that, because he’s alive,” was the answer of José
Arcadio Buendía, who finished the seventy-two hours with the mercurial incense as the body was
already beginning to burst with a livid fluorescence, the soft whistles of which impregnated the
house with a pestilential vapor. Only then did he permit them to bury him, not in any ordinary way,
but with the honors reserved for Macondo’s greatest benefactor. It was the first burial and the best-
attended one that was ever seen in the town, only surpassed, a century later, by Big Mama’s funeral
carnival. They buried him in a grave dug in the center of the plot destined for the cemetery, with a
stone on which they wrote the only thing they knew about him: MELQUÍADES. They gave him his
nine nights of wake. In the tumult that gathered in the courtyard to drink coffee, tell jokes, and play
cards. Amaranta found a chance to confess her love to Pietro Crespi, who a few weeks before had
formalized his promise to Rebeca and had set up a store for musical instruments and mechanical
toys in the same section where the Arabs had lingered in other times swapping knickknacks for
macaws, and which the people called the Street of the Turks. The Italian, whose head covered with
patent leather curls aroused in women an irrepressible need to sigh, dealt with Amaranta as with a
capricious little girl who was not worth taking seriously.

“I have a younger brother,” he told her. “He’s coming to help me in the store.”

Amaranta felt humiliated and told Pietro Crespi with a virulent anger that she was prepared to
stop her sister’s wedding even if her own dead body had to lie across the door. The Italian was so
impressed by the dramatics of the threat that he could not resist the temptation to mention it to
Rebeca. That was how Amaranta’s trip, always put off by Úrsula’s work, was arranged in less than a
week. Amaranta put up no resistance, but when she kissed Rebeca good-bye she whispered in her
ear:

“Don’t get your hopes up. Even if they send me to the ends of the earth I’ll find some way of
stopping you from getting married, even if I have to kill you.”

With the absence of Úrsula, with the invisible presence of Melquíades, who continued his stealthy
shuffling through the rooms, the house seemed enormous and empty. Rebeca took charge of
domestic order, while the Indian woman took care of the bakery. At dusk, when Pietro Crespi would
arrive, preceded by a cool breath of lavender and always bringing a toy as a gift, his fiancée would
receive the visitor in the main parlor with doors and windows open to be safe from any suspicion. It
was an unnecessary precaution, for the Italian had shown himself to be so respectful that he did not
even touch the hand of the woman who was going to be his wife within the year. Those visits were
filling the house with remarkable toys. Mechanical ballerinas, music boxes, acrobatic monkeys,
trotting horses, clowns who played the tambourine: the rich and startling mechanical fauna that


Pietro Crespi brought dissipated José Arcadio Buendía’s affliction over the death of Melquíades and
carried him back to his old days as an alchemist. He lived at that time in a paradise of disemboweled
animals, of mechanisms that had been taken apart in an attempt to perfect them with a system of
perpetual motion based upon the principles of the pendulum. Aureliano, for his part, had neglected
the workshop in order to teach little Remedios to read and write. At first the child preferred her
dolls to the man who would come every afternoon and who was responsible for her being separated
from her toys in order to be bathed and dressed and seated in the parlor to receive the visitor. But
Aureliano’s patience and devotion finally won her over, up to the point where she would spend
many hours with him studying the meaning of the letters and sketching in a notebook with colored
pencils little houses with cows in the corral and round suns with yellow rays that hid behind the hills.

Only Rebeca was unhappy, because of Amaranta’s threat. She knew her sister’s character, the
haughtiness of her spirit, and she was frightened by the virulence of her anger. She would spend
whole hours sucking her finger in the bathroom, holding herself back with an exhausting iron will so
as not to eat earth. In search of some relief for her uncertainty, she called Pilar Ternera to read her
future. After a string of conventional vagaries, Pilar Ternera predicted:

“You will not be happy as long as your parents remain unburied.”

Rebeca shuddered. As in the memory of a dream she saw herself entering the house as a very
small girl, with the trunk and the little rocker, and a bag whose contents she had never known. She
remembered a bald gentleman dressed in linen and with his collar closed by a gold button, who had
nothing to do with the king of hearts. She remembered a very young and beautiful woman with
warm and perfumed hands, who had nothing in common with the jack of diamonds and his
rheumatic hands, and who used to put flowers in her hair and take her out walking in the afternoon
through a town with green streets.

“I don’t understand,” she said.

Pilar Ternera seemed disconcerted:

“I don’t either, but that’s what the cards say.”

Rebeca was so preoccupied with the enigma that she told it to José Arcadio Buendía, and he
scolded her for believing in the predictions of the cards, but he undertook the silent task of
searching closets and trunks, moving furniture and turning over beds and floorboards looking for
the bag of bones. He remembered that he had not seen it since the time of the rebuilding. He
secretly summoned the masons and one of them revealed that he had walled up the bag in some
bedroom because it bothered him in his work. After several days of listening, with their ears against
the walls, they perceived the deep cloc-cloc. They penetrated the wall and there were the bones in the
intact bag. They buried it the same day in a grave without a stone next to that of Melquíades, and
José Arcadio Buendía returned home free of a burden that for a moment had weighed on his
conscience as much as the memory of Prudencio Aguilar. When he went through the kitchen he
kissed Rebeca on the forehead.

“Get those bad thoughts out of your head,” he told her. “You’re going to be happy.”

The friendship with Rebeca opened up to Pilar Ternera the doors of the house, closed by Úrsula
since the birth of Arcadio. She would arrive at any hour of the day, like a flock of goats, and would
unleash her feverish energy in the hardest tasks. Sometimes she would go into the workshop and
help Arcadio sensitize the daguerreotype plates with an efficiency and a tenderness that ended up by
confusing him. That woman bothered him. The tan of her skin, her smell of smoke, the disorder of
her laughter in the darkroom distracted his attention and made him bump into things.

On a certain occasion Aureliano was there working on his silver, and Pilar Ternera leaned over
the table to admire his laborious patience. Suddenly it happened. Aureliano made sure that Arcadio
was in the darkroom before raising his eyes and meeting those of Pilar Ternera, whose thought was
perfectly visible, as if exposed to the light of noon.


“Well,” Aureliano said. “Tell me what it is.”

Pilar Ternera bit her lips with a sad smile.

“That you’d be good in a war,” she said. “Where you put your eye, you put your bullet.”

Aureliano relaxed with the proof of the omen. He went back to concentrate on his work as if
nothing had happened, and his voice took on a restful strength.

“I will recognize him,” he said. “He’ll bear my name.”

José Arcadio Buendía finally got what he was looking for: he connected the mechanism of the
clock to a mechanical ballerina, and the toy danced uninterruptedly to the rhythm of her own music
for three days. That discovery excited him much more than any of his other harebrained
undertakings. He stopped eating. He stopped sleeping. Only the vigilance and care of Rebeca kept
him from being dragged off by his imagination into a state of perpetual delirium from which he
would not recover. He would spend the nights walking around the room thinking aloud, searching
for a way to apply the principles of the pendulum to oxcarts, to harrows, to everything that was
useful when put into motion. The fever of insomnia fatigued him so much that one dawn he could
not recognize the old man with white hair and uncertain gestures who came into his bedroom. It
was Prudencio Aguilar. When he finally identified him, startled that the dead also aged, José Arcadio
Buendía felt himself shaken by nostalgia. “Prudencio,” he exclaimed. “You’ve come from a long way
off!” After many years of death the yearning for the living was so intense, the need for company so
pressing, so terrifying the neatness of that other death which exists within death, that Prudencio
Aguilar had ended up loving his worst enemy. He had spent a great deal of time looking for him. He
asked the dead from Riohacha about him, the dead who came from the Upar Valley, those who
came from the swamp, and no one could tell him because Macondo was a town that was unknown
to the dead until Melquíades arrived and marked it with a small black dot on the motley maps of
death. José Arcadio Buendía conversed with Prudencio Aguilar until dawn. A few hours later, worn
out by the vigil, he went into Aureliano’s workshop and asked him: “What day is today?” Aureliano
told him that it was Tuesday. “I was thinking the same thing,” José Arcadio Buendía said, “but
suddenly I realized that it’s still Monday, like yesterday. Look at the sky, look at the walls, look at the
begonias. Today is Monday too.” Used to his manias, Aureliano paid no attention to him. On the
next day, Wednesday, José Arcadio Buendía went back to the workshop. “This is a disaster,” he said.
“Look at the air, listen to the buzzing of the sun, the same as yesterday and the day before. Today is
Monday too.” That night Pietro Crespi found him on the porch, weeping for Prudencio Aguilar, for
Melquíades, for Rebeca’s parents, for his mother and father, for all of those he could remember and
who were now alone in death. He gave him a mechanical bear that walked on its hind legs on a
tightrope, but he could not distract him from his obsession. He asked him what had happened to
the project he had explained to him a few days before about the possibility of building a pendulum
machine that would help men to fly and he answered that it was impossible because a pendulum
could lift anything into the air but it could not lift itself. On Thursday he appeared in the workshop
again with the painful look of plowed ground. “The time machine has broken,” he almost sobbed,
“and Úrsula and Amaranta so far away!” Aureliano scolded him like a child and he adopted a
contrite air. He spent six hours examining things, trying to find a difference from their appearance
on the previous day in the hope of discovering in them some change that would reveal the passage
of time. He spent the whole night in bed with his eyes open, calling to Prudencio Aguilar, to
Melquíades, to all the dead, so that they would share his distress. But no one came. On Friday.
before anyone arose, he watched the appearance of nature again until he did not have the slightest
doubt but that it was Monday. Then he grabbed the bar from a door and with the savage violence of
his uncommon strength he smashed to dust the equipment in the alchemy laboratory, the
daguerreotype room, the silver workshop, shouting like a man possessed in some high-sounding and
fluent but completely incomprehensible language. He was about to finish off the rest of the house


when Aureliano asked the neighbors for help. Ten men were needed to get him down, fourteen to
tie him up, twenty to drag him to the chestnut tree in the courtyard, where they left him tied up,
barking in the strange language and giving off a green froth at the mouth. When Úrsula and
Amaranta returned he was still tied to the trunk of the chestnut tree by his hands and feet, soaked
with rain and in a state of total innocence. They spoke to him and he looked at them without
recognizing them, saying things they did not understand. Úrsula untied his wrists and ankles, lacer-
ated by the pressure of the rope, and left him tied only by the waist. Later on they built him a shelter
of palm brandies to protect him from the sun and the rain.


Chapter 5

AURELIANO BUENDÍA and Remedios Moscote were married one Sunday in March before the altar
Father Nicanor Reyna had set up in the parlor. It was the culmination of four weeks of shocks in the
Moscote household because little Remedios had reached puberty before getting over the habits of
childhood. In spite of the fact that her mother had taught her about the changes of adolescence, one
February afternoon she burst shouting into the living room, where her sisters were chatting with
Aureliano, and showed them her panties, smeared with a chocolate-colored paste. A month for the
wedding was agreed upon. There was barely enough time to teach her how to wash herself, get
dressed by herself, and understand the fundamental business of a home. They made her urinate over
hot bricks in order to cure her of the habit of wetting her bed. It took a good deal of work to
convince her of the inviolability of the marital secret, for Remedios was so confused and at the same
time so amazed at the revelation that she wanted to talk to everybody about the details of the
wedding night. It was a fatiguing effort, but on the date set for the ceremony the child was as adept
in the ways of the world as any of her sisters. Don Apolinar Moscote escorted her by the arm down
the street that was decorated with flowers and wreaths amidst the explosion of rockets and the
music of several bands, and she waved with her hand and gave her thanks with a smile to those who
wished her good luck from the windows. Aureliano, dressed in black, wearing the same patent
leather boots with metal fasteners that he would have on a few years later as he faced the firing
squad, had an intense paleness and a hard lump in his throat when he met the bride at the door of
the house and led her to the altar. She behaved as naturally, with such discretion, that she did not
lose her composure, not even when Aureliano dropped the ring as he tried to put it on her finger. In
the midst of the. murmurs and confusion of the guests, she kept her arm with the fingerless lace
glove held up and remained like that with her ring finger ready until the bridegroom managed to
stop the ring with his foot before it rolled to the door, and came back blushing to the altar. Her
mother and sisters suffered so much from the fear that the child would do something wrong during
the ceremony that in the end they were the ones who committed the impertinence of picking her up
to kiss her. From that day on the sense of responsibility, the natural grace, the calm control that
Remedios would have in the face of adverse circumstances was revealed. It was she who, on her
own initiative, put aside the largest piece that she had cut from the wedding cake and took it on a
plate with a fork to José Arcadio Buendía. Tied to the trunk of the chestnut tree, huddled on a
wooden stool underneath the palm shelter, the enormous old man, discolored by the sun and rain,
made a vague smile of gratitude and at the piece of cake with his fingers, mumbling an unintelligible
psalm. The only unhappy person in that noisy celebration, which lasted until dawn on Monday, was
Rebeca Buendía. It was her own frustrated party. By an arrangement of Úrsula’s, her marriage was to
be celebrated on the same day, but that Friday Pietro Crespi received a letter with the news of his
mother’s imminent death. The wedding was postponed. Pietro Crespi left for the capital of the
province an hour after receiving the letter, and on the road he missed his mother, who arrived
punctually Saturday night and at Aureliano’s wedding sang the sad aria that she had prepared for the
wedding of her son. Pietro Crespi returned on Sunday midnight to sweep up the ashes of the party,
after having worn out five horses on the road in an attempt to be in time for his wedding. It was
never discovered who wrote the letter. Tormented by Úrsula, Amaranta wept with indignation and
swore her innocence in front of the altar, which the carpenters had not finished dismantling.

Father Nicanor Reyna—whom Don Apolinar Moscote had brought from the swamp to officiate
at the wedding—was an old man hardened by the ingratitude of his ministry. His skin was sad, with
the bones almost exposed, and he had a pronounced round stomach and the expression of an old


angel, which came more from, simplicity than from goodness. He had planned to return to his
pariah after the wedding, but he was appalled at the hardness of the inhabitants of Macondo, who
were prospering in the midst of scandal, subject to the natural law, without baptizing their children
or sanctifying their festivals. Thinking that no land needed the seed of God so much, he decided to
stay on for another week to Christianize both circumcised and gentile, legalize concubinage, and give
the sacraments to the dying. But no one paid any attention to him. They would answer him that they
had been many years without a priest, arranging the business of their souls directly with God, and
that they had lost the evil of original sin. Tired of preaching in the open, Father Nicanor decided to
undertake the building of a church, the largest in the world, with life-size saints and stained-glass
windows on the sides, so that people would come from Rome to honor God in the center of
impiety. He went everywhere begging alms with a copper dish. They gave him a large amount, but
he wanted more, because the church had to have a bell that would raise the drowned up to the
surface of the water. He pleaded so much that he lost his voice. His bones began to fill with sounds.
One Saturday, not even having collected the price of the doors, he fell into a desperate confusion.
He improvised an altar in the square and on Sunday he went through the town with a small bell, as
in the days of insomnia, calling people to an open-air mass. Many went out of curiosity. Others from
nostalgia. Others so that God would not take the disdain for His intermediary as a personal insult.
So that at eight in the morning half the town was in the square, where Father Nicanor chanted the
gospels in a voice that had been lacerated by his pleading. At the end, when the congregation began
to break up, he raised his arms signaling for attention.

“Just a moment,” he said. “Now we shall witness an undeniable proof of the infinite power of
God.”

The boy who had helped him with the mass brought him a cup of thick and steaming chocolate,
which he drank without pausing to breathe. Then he wiped his lips with a handkerchief that he drew
from his sleeve, extended his arms, and closed his eyes. Thereupon Father Nicanor rose six inches
above the level of the ground. It was a convincing measure. He went among the houses for several
days repeating the demonstration of levitation by means of chocolate while the acolyte collected so
much money in a bag that in less than a month he began the construction of the church. No one
doubted the divine origin of the demonstration except José Arcadio Buendía, who without changing
expression watched the troop of people who gathered around the chestnut tree one morning to
witness the revelation once more. He merely stretched on his stool a little and shrugged his
shoulders when Father Nicanor began to rise up from the ground along with the chair he was sitting
on.

“Hoc est simplicissimus,” José Arcadio Buendía said. “Homo iste statum quartum materiae invenit.”

Father Nicanor raised his hands and the four legs of the chair all landed on the ground at the
same time. “Nego,” he said. “Factum hoc existentiam Dei probat sine dubio.”

Thus it was discovered that José Arcadio Buendía’s devilish jargon was Latin. Father Nicanor
took advantage of the circumstance of his being the only person who had been able to communicate
with him to try to inject the faith into his twisted mind. Every afternoon he would sit by the
chestnut tree preaching in Latin, but José Arcadio Buendía insisted on rejecting rhetorical tricks and
the transmutation of chocolate, and he demanded the daguerreotype of God as the only proof.
Father Nicanor then brought him medals and pictures and even a reproduction of the Veronica, but
José Arcadio Buendía rejected them as artistic objects without any scientific basis. He was so
stubborn that Father Nicanor gave up his attempts at evangelization and continued visiting him out
of humanitarian feelings. But then it was José Arcadio Buendía who took the lead and tried to break
down the priest’s faith with rationalist tricks. On a certain occasion when Father Nicanor brought a
checker set to the chestnut tree and invited him to a game, José Arcadio Buendía would not accept,
because according to him he could never understand the sense of a contest in which the two


adversaries have agreed upon the rules. Father Nicanor, who had never seen checkers played that
way, could not play it again. Ever more startled at José Arcadio Buendía’s lucidity, he asked him how
it was possible that they had him tied to a tree.

“Hoc est simplicissimus,” he replied. “Because I’m Crazy.”

From then on, concerned about his own faith, the priest did not come back to visit him and
dedicated himself to hurrying along the building of the church. Rebeca felt her hopes being reborn.
Her future was predicated on the completion of the work, for one Sunday when Father Nicanor was
lunching at the house and the whole family sitting at the table spoke of the solemnity and splendor
that religious ceremonies would acquire when the church was built, Amaranta said: “The luckiest
one will be Rebeca.” And since Rebeca did not understand what she meant, she explained it to her
with an innocent smile:

“You’re going to be the one who will inaugurate the church with your wedding.”

Rebeca tried to forestall any comments. The way the construction was going the church would
not be built before another ten years. Father Nicanor did not agree: the growing generosity of the
faithful permitted him to make more optimistic calculations. To the mute Indignation of Rebeca,
who could not finish her lunch, Úrsula celebrated Amaranta’s idea and contributed a considerable
sum for the work to move faster. Father Nicanor felt that with another contribution like that the
church would be ready within three years. From then on Rebeca did not say another word to
Amaranta, convinced that her initiative had not the innocence that she attempted to give it. “That
was the least serious thing I could have done,” Amaranta answered her during the violent argument
they had that night. “In that way I won’t have to kill you for three years.” Rebeca accepted the
challenge.

When Pietro Crespi found out about the new postponement, he went through a crisis of
disappointment, but Rebeca gave him a final proof of her loyalty. “We’ll elope whenever you say,”
she told him. Pietro Crespi, however, was not a man of adventure. He lacked the impulsive character
of his fiancée and he considered respect for one’s given word as a wealth that should not be
squandered. Then Rebeca turned to more audacious methods. A mysterious wind blew out the
lamps in the parlor and Úrsula surprised the lovers kissing in the dark. Pietro Crespi gave her some
confused explanations about the poor quality of modern pitch lamps and he even helped her install a
more secure system of illumination for the room. But the fuel failed again or the wicks became
clogged and Úrsula found Rebeca sitting on her fiancé’s lap. This time she would accept no
explanation. She turned the responsibility of the bakery over to the Indian woman and sat in a
rocking chair to watch over the young people during the visits, ready to win out over maneuvers that
had already been old when she was a girl. “Poor Mama,” Rebeca would say with mock indignation,
seeing Úrsula yawn during the boredom of the visits. “When she dies she’ll go off to her reward in
that rocking chair.” After three months of supervised love, fatigued by the slow progress of the
construction, which he went to inspect every day, Pietro Crespi decided to give Father Nicanor the
money he needed to finish the church. Amaranta did not grow impatient. As she conversed with her
girl friends every afternoon when they came to embroider on the porch, she tried to think of new
subterfuges. A mistake in calculation spoiled the one she considered the most effective: removing
the mothballs that Rebeca had put in her wedding dress before she put it away in the bedroom
dresser. She did it when two months were left for the completion of the church. But Rebeca was so
impatient with the approach of the wedding that she wanted to get the dress ready earlier than
Amaranta had foreseen. When she opened the dresser and unfolded first the papers and then the
protective cloth, she found the fabric of the dress and the stitches of the veil and even the crown of
orange blossoms perforated by moths. Although she was sure that she had put a handful of
mothballs in the wrappings, the disaster seemed so natural that she did not dare blame Amaranta.
There was less than a month until the wedding, but Amparo Moscote promised to sew a new dress


within a week. Amaranta felt faint that rainy noontime when Amparo came to the house wrapped in
the froth of needlework for Rebeca to have the final fitting of the dress. She lost her voice and a
thread of cold sweat ran down the path of her spine. For long months she had trembled with fright
waiting for that hour, because if she had not been able to conceive the ultimate obstacle to Rebeca’s
wedding, she was sure that at the last moment, when all the resources of her imagination had failed,
she would have the courage to poison her. That afternoon, while Rebeca was suffocating with heat
inside the armor of thread that Amparo Moscote was putting about her body with thousands of pins
and infinite patience, Amaranta made several mistakes in her crocheting and pricked her finger with
the needle, but she decided with frightful coldness that the date would be the last Friday before the
wedding and the method would be a dose of laudanum in her coffee.

A greater obstacle, as impassable as it was unforeseen, obliged a new and indefinite
postponement. One week before the date set for the wedding, little Remedios woke up in the middle
of the night soaked in a hot broth which had exploded in her insides with a kind of tearing belch,
and she died three days later, poisoned by her own blood, with a pair of twins crossed in her
stomach. Amarante suffered a crisis of conscience. She had begged God with such fervor for
something fearful to happen so that she would not have to poison Rebeca that she felt guilty of
Remedios’ death. That was not the obstacle that she had begged for so much. Remedios had
brought a breath of merriment to the house. She had settled down with her husband in a room near
the workshop, which she decorated with the dolls and toys of her recent childhood, and her merry
vitality overflowed the four walls of the bedroom and went like a whirlwind of good health along the
porch with the begonias: She would start singing at dawn. She was the only person who dared
intervene in the arguments between Rebeca and Amaranta. She plunged into the fatiguing chore of
taking care of José Arcadio Buendía. She would bring him his food, she would help him with his
daily necessities, wash him with soap and a scrubbing brush, keep his hair and beard free of lice and
nits, keep the palm shelter in good condition and reinforce it with waterproof canvas in stormy
weather. In her last months she had succeeded in communicating with him in phrases of
rudimentary Latin. When the son of Aureliano and Pilar Ternera was born and brought to the house
and baptized in an intimate ceremony with the name Aureliano José, Remedios decided that he
would be considered their oldest child. Her maternal instinct surprised Úrsula. Aureliano, for his
part, found in her the justification that he needed to live. He worked all day in his workshop and
Remedios would bring him a cup of black coffee in the middle of the morning. They would both
visit the Moscotes every night. Aureliano would play endless games of dominoes with his father-in-
law while Remedios chatted with her sisters or talked to her mother about more important things.
The link with the Buendías consolidated Don Apolinar Moscote’s authority in the town. On
frequent trips to the capital of the province he succeeded in getting the government to build a
school so that Arcadio, who had inherited the educational enthusiasm of his grandfather, could take
charge of it. Through persuasion he managed to get the majority of houses painted blue in time for
the date of national independence. At the urging of Father Nicanor, he arranged for the transfer of
Catarino’s store to a back street and he closed down several scandalous establishments that
prospered in the center of town. Once he returned with six policemen armed with rifles to whom he
entrusted the maintenance of order, and no one remembered the original agreement not to have
armed men in the town. Aureliano enjoyed his father-in-law’s efficiency. “You’re going to get as fat
as he is,” his friends would say to him. But his sedentary life, which accentuated his cheekbones and
concentrated the sparkle of his eyes, did not increase his weight or alter the parsimony of his
character, but, on the contrary, it hardened on his lips the straight line of solitary meditation and
implacable decision. So deep was the affection that he and his wife had succeeded in arousing in
both their families that when Remedios announced that she was going to have a child. even Rebeca
and Amaranta declared a truce in order to knit items in blue wool if it was to be a boy and in pink


wool in case it was a girl. She was the last person Arcadio thought about a few years later when he
faced the firing squad.

Úrsula ordered a mourning period of closed doors and windows, with no one entering or leaving
except on matters of utmost necessity. She prohibited any talking aloud for a year and she put
Remedios’ daguerreotype in the place where her body had been laid out, with a black ribbon around
it and an oil lamp that was always kept lighted. Future generations, who never let the lamp go out,
would be puzzled at that girl in a pleated skirt, white boots, and with an organdy band around her
head, and they were never able to connect her with the standard image of a great-grandmother.
Amaranta took charge of Aureliano José. She adopted him as a son who would share her solitude
and relieve her from the involutary laudanum that her mad beseeching had thrown into Remedios’
coffee. Pietro Crespi would tiptoe in at dusk, with a black ribbon on his hat, and he would pay a
silent visit to Rebeca, who seemed to be bleeding to death inside the black dress with sleeves down
to her wrists. Just the idea of thinking about a new date for the wedding would have been so
irreverent that the engagement turned into an eternal relationship, a fatigued love that no one
worried about again, as if the lovers, who in other days had sabotaged the lamps in order to kiss, had
been abandoned to the free will of death. Having lost her bearings, completely demoralized, Rebeca
began eating earth again.

Suddenly—when the mourning had gone on so long that the needlepoint sessions began again—
someone pushed open the street door at two in the afternoon in the mortal silence of the heat and
the braces in the foundation shook with such force that Amaranta and her friends sewing on the
porch, Rebeca sucking her finger in her bedroom, Úrsula in the kitchen, Aureliano in the workshop,
and even José Arcadio Buendía under the solitary chestnut tree had the impression that an
earthquake was breaking up the house. A huge man had arrived. His square shoulders barely fitted
through the doorways. He was wearing a medal of Our Lady of Help around his bison neck, his
arms and chest were completely covered with cryptic tattooing, and on his right wrist was the tight
copper bracelet of the niños-en-cruz amulet. His skin was tanned by the salt of the open air, his hair
was short and straight like the mane of a mule, his jaws were of iron, and he wore a sad smile. He
had a belt on that was twice as thick as the cinch of a horse, boots with leggings and spurs and iron
on the heels, and his presence gave the quaking impression of a seismic tremor. He went through
the parlor and the living room, carrying some half-worn saddlebags in his hand, and he appeared like
a thunderclap on the porch with the begonias where Amaranta and her friends were paralyzed, their
needles in the air. “Hello,” he said to them in a tired voice, threw the saddlebags on a worktable, and
went by on his way to the back of the house. “Hello,” he said to the startled Rebecca, who saw him
pass by the door of her bedroom. “Hello,” he said to Aureliano, who was at his silversmith’s bench
with all five senses alert. He did not linger with anyone. He went directly to the kitchen and there he
stopped for the first time at the end of a trip that had begun of the other side of the world. “Hello,”
he said. Úrsula stood for a fraction of a second with her mouth open, looked into his eyes, gave a
cry, and flung her arms around his neck, shouting and weeping with joy. It was José Arcadio. He was
returning as poor as when he had left, to such an extreme that Úrsula had to give him two pesos to
pay for the rental of his horse. He spoke a Spanish that was larded with sailor slang. They asked
where he had been and he answered: “Out there.” He hung his hammock in the room they assigned
him and slept for three days. When he woke up, after eating sixteen raw eggs, he went directly to
Catarino’s store, where his monumental size provoked a panic of curiosity among the women. He
called for music and cane liquor for everyone, to be put on his bill. He would Indian-wrestle with
five men at the same time. “It can’t be done,” they said, convinced that they would not be able to
move his arm. “He has niños-en-cruz.” Catarino, who did not believe in magical tricks of strength, bet
him twelve pesos that he could not move the counter. José Arcadio pulled it out of its place, lifted it
over his head, and put it in the street. It took eleven men to put it back. In the heat of the party he


exhibited his unusual masculinity on the bar, completely covered with tattoos of words in several
languages intertwined in blue and red. To the women who were besieging him and coveting him he
put the question as to who would pay the most. The one who had the most money offered him
twenty pesos. Then he proposed raffling himself off among them at ten pesos a chance. It was a
fantastic price because the most sought-after woman earned eight pesos a night, but they all
accepted. They wrote their names on fourteen pieces of paper which they put into a hat and each
woman took one out. When there were only two pieces left to draw, it was established to whom they
belonged.

“Five pesos more from each one,” José Arcadio proposed, “and I’ll share myself with both.

He made his living that way. He had been around the world sixty-five times, enlisted in a crew of
sailors without a country. The women who went to bed with him that night in Catarino’s store
brought him naked into the dance salon so that people could see that there was not a square inch of
his body that was not tattooed, front and back, and from his neck to his toes. He did not succeed in
becoming incorporated into the family. He slept all day and spent the night in the red-light district,
making bets on his strength. On the rare occasions when Úrsula got him to sit down at the table, he
gave signs of radiant good humor, especially when he told about his adventures in remote countries.
He had been shipwrecked and spent two weeks adrift in the Sea of Japan, feeding on the body of a
comrade who had succumbed to sunstroke and whose extremely salty flesh as it cooked in the sun
had a sweet and granular taste. Under a bright noonday sun in the Gulf of Bengal his ship had killed
a sea dragon, in the stomach of which they found the helmet, the buckles, and the weapons of a
Crusader. In the Caribbean he had seen the ghost of the pirate ship of Victor Hugues, with its sails
torn by the winds of death, the masts chewed by sea worms, and still looking for the course to
Guadeloupe. Úrsula would weep at the table as if she were reading the letters that had never arrived
and in which José Arcadio told about his deeds and misadventures. “And there was so much of a
home here for you, my son,” she would sob, “and so much food thrown to the hogs!” But
underneath it an she could not conceive that the boy the gypsies took away was the same lout who
would eat half a suckling pig for lunch and whose flatulence withered the flowers. Something similar
took place with the rest of the family. Amaranta could not conceal the repugnance that she felt at
the table because of his bestial belching. Arcadio, who never knew the secret of their relationship,
scarcely answered the questions that he asked with the obvious idea of gaining his affection.
Aureliano tried to relive the times when they slept in the same room, tried to revive the complicity
of childhood, but José Arcadio had forgotten about it, because life at sea had saturated his memory
with too many things to remember. Only Rebeca succumbed to the first impact. The day that she
saw him pass by her bedroom she thought that Pietro Crespi was a sugary dandy next to that
protomale whose volcanic breathing could be heard all over the house. She tried to get near him
under any pretext. On a certain occasion José Arcadio looked at her body with shameless attention
and said to her “You’re a woman, little sister.” Rebeca lost control of herself. She went back to
eating earth and the whitewash on the walls with the avidity of previous days, and she sucked her
finger with so much anxiety that she developed a callus on her thumb. She vomited up a green liquid
with dead leeches in it. She spent nights awake shaking with fever, fighting against delirium, waiting
until the house shook with the return of José Arcadio at dawn. One afternoon, when everyone was
having a siesta, she could no longer resist and went to his bedroom. She found him in his shorts,
lying in the hammock that he had hung from the beams with a ship’s hawser. She was so impressed
by his enormous motley nakedness that she felt an impulse to retreat. “Excuse me,” she said, “I
didn’t know you were here.” But she lowered her voice so as not to wake anyone up. “Come here,”
he said. Rebeca obeyed. She stopped beside the hammock in an icy sweat, feeling knots forming in
her intestines, while José Arcadio stroked her ankles with the tips of his fingers, then her calves, then
her thighs, murmuring: “Oh, little sister, little sister.” She had to make a supernatural effort not to


die when a startlingly regulated cyclonic power lifted her up by the waist and despoiled her of her
intimacy with three clashes of its claws and quartered her like a little bird. She managed to thank
God for having been born before she lost herself in the inconceivable pleasure of that unbearable
pain, splashing in the steaming marsh of the hammock which absorbed the explosion of blood like a
blotter.

Three days later they were married during the five-o’clock mass. José Arcadio had gone to Pietro
Crespi’s store the day before. He found him giving a zither lesson and did not draw him aside to
speak to him. “I’m going to marry Rebeca,” he told him. Pietro Crespi turned pale, gave the zither to
one of his pupils, and dismissed the class. When they were alone in the room that was crowded with
musical instruments and mechanical toys, Pietro Crespi said:

“She’s your sister.”

“I don’t care,” José Arcadio replied.

Pietro Crespi mopped his brow with the handkerchief that was soaked in lavender.

“It’s against nature,” he explained, “and besides, it’s against the law.”

José Arcadio grew impatient, not so much at the argument as over Pietro Crespi’s paleness.

“Fuck nature two times over,” he said. “And I’ve come to tell you not to bother going to ask
Rebeca anything.”

But his brutal deportment broke down when he saw Pietro Crespi’s eyes grow moist.

“Now,” he said to him in a different tone, “if you really like the family, there’s Amaranta for
you.”

Father Nicanor revealed in his Sunday sermon that José Arcadio and Rebeca were not brother
and sister. Úrsula never forgave what she considered an inconceivable lack of respect and when they
came back from church she forbade the newlyweds to set foot in the house again. For her it was as
if they were dead. So they rented a house across from the cemetery and established themselves there
with no other furniture but José Arcadio’s hammock. On their wedding night a scorpion that had
got into her slipper bit Rebeca on the foot. Her tongue went to sleep, but that did not stop them
from spending a scandalous honeymoon. The neighbors were startled by the cries that woke up the
whole district as many as eight times in a single night and three times during siesta, and they prayed
that such wild passion would not disturb the peace of the dead.

Aureliano was the only one who was concerned about them. He bought them some furniture and
gave them some money until José Arcadio recovered his sense of reality and began to work the no-
man’s-land that bordered the courtyard of the house. Amaranta, on the other hand, never did
overcome her rancor against Rebeca, even though life offered her a satisfaction of which she had
not dreamed: at the initiative of Úrsula, who did not know how to repair the shame, Pietro Crespi
continued having lunch at the house on Tuesdays, rising above his defeat with a serene dignity. He
still wore the black ribbon on his hat as a sign of respect for the family, and he took pleasure in
showing his affection for Úrsula by bringing her exotic gifts: Portuguese sardines, Turkish rose
marmalade, and on one occasion a lovely Manila shawl. Amaranta looked after him with a loving
diligence. She anticipated his wants, pulled out the threads on the cuffs of his shirt, and embroidered
a dozen handkerchiefs with his initials for his birthday. On Tuesdays, after lunch, while she would
embroider on the porch, he would keep her happy company. For Pietro Crespi, that woman whom
he always had considered and treated as a child was a revelation. Although her temperament lacked
grace, she had a rare sensibility for appreciating the things of the world and had a secret tenderness.
One Tuesday, when no one doubted that sooner or later it had to happen, Pietro Crespi asked her to
marry him. She did not stop her work. She waited for the hot blush to leave her ears and gave her
voice a serene stress of maturity.

“Of course, Crespi,” she said. “But when we know each other better. It’s never good to be hasty
in things.”


Úrsula was confused. In spite of the esteem she had for Pietro Crespi, she could not tell whether
his decision was good or bad from the moral point of view after his prolonged and famous
engagement to Rebeca. But she finally accepted it as an unqualified fact because no one shared her
doubts. Aureliano, who was the man of the house, confused her further with his enigmatic and final
opinion:

“These are not times to go around thinking about weddings.”

That opinion, which Úrsula understood only some months later, was the only sincere one that
Aureliano could express at that moment, not only with respect to marriage, but to anything that was
not war. He himself, facing a firing squad, would not understand too well the concatenation of the
series of subtle but irrevocable accidents that brought him to that point. The death of Remedios had
not produced the despair that he had feared. It was, rather, a dull feeling of rage that grades ally
dissolved in a solitary and passive frustration similar to the one he had felt during the time he was
resigned to living without a woman. He plunged into his work again, but he kept up the custom of
playing dominoes with his father-in-law. In a house bound up in mourning, the nightly
conversations consolidated the friendship between the two men. “Get married again. Aurelito,” his
father-in-law would tell him. “I have six daughters for you to choose from.” On one occasion on the
eve of the elections, Don Apolinar Moscote returned from one of his frequent trips worried about
the political situation in the country. The Liberals were determined to go to war. Since Aureliano at
that time had very confused notions about the difference between Conservatives and Liberals, his
father-in-law gave him some schematic lessons. The Liberals, he said, were Freemasons, bad people,
wanting to hang priests, to institute civil marriage and divorce, to recognize the rights of illegitimate
children as equal to those of legitimate ones, and to cut the country up into a federal system that
would take power away from the supreme authority. The Conservatives, on the other hand, who had
received their power directly from God, proposed the establishment of public order and family
morality. They were the defenders of the faith of Christ, of the principle of authority, and were not
prepared to permit the country to be broken down into autonomous entities. Because of his
humanitarian feelings Aureliano sympathized with the Liberal attitude with respect to the rights of
natural children, but in any case, he could not understand how people arrived at the extreme of
waging war over things that could not be touched with the hand. It seemed an exaggeration to him
that for the elections his father-in-law had them send six soldiers armed with rifles under the
command of a sergeant to a town with no political passions. They not only arrived, but they went
from house to house confiscating hunting weapons, machetes, and even kitchen knives before they
distributed among males over twenty-one the blue ballots with the names of the Conservative
candidates and the red ballots with the names of the Liberal candidates. On the eve of the elections
Don Apolinar Moscote himself read a decree that prohibited the sale of alcoholic beverages and the
gathering together of more than three people who were not of the same family. The elections took
place without incident. At eight o’clock on Sunday morning a wooden ballot box was set up in the
square, which was watched over by the six soldiers. The voting was absolutely free, as Aureliano
himself was able to attest since he spent almost the entire day with his father-in-law seeing that no
one voted more than once. At four in the afternoon a roll of drums in the square announced the
closing of the polls and Don Apolinar Moscote sealed the ballot box with a label crossed by his
signature. That night, while he played dominoes with Aureliano, he ordered the sergeant to break the
seal in order to count the votes. There were almost as many red ballots as blue, but the sergeant left
only ten red ones and made up the difference with blue ones. Then they sealed the box again with a
new label and the first thing on the following day it was taken to the capital of the province. “The
Liberals will go to war,” Aureliano said. Don Apolinar concentrated on his domino pieces. “If you’re
saying that because of the switch in ballots, they won’t,” he said. “We left a few red ones in so there
won’t be any complaints.” Aureliano understood the disadvantages of being in the opposition. “If I


were a Liberal,” he said, “I’d go to war because of those ballots.” His father-in-law looked at him
over his glasses.

“Come now, Aurelito,” he said, “if you were a Liberal, even though you’re my son-in-law, you
wouldn’t have seen the switching of the ballots.”

What really caused indignation in the town was. not the results of the elections but the fact that
the soldiers had not returned the weapons. A group of women spoke with Aureliano so that he
could obtain the return of their kitchen knives from his father-in-law. Don Apolinar Moscote
explained to him, in strictest confidence, that the soldiers had taken the weapons off as proof that
the Liberals were preparing for war. The cynicism of the remark alarmed him. He said nothing, but
on a certain night when Gerineldo Márquez and Magnífico Visbal were speaking with some other
friends about the incident of the knives, they asked him if he was a Liberal or a Conservative.
Aureliano did not hesitate.

“If I have to be something I’ll be a Liberal,” he said, “because the Conservatives are tricky.”

On the following day, at the urging of his friends, he went to see Dr. Alirio Noguera to be treated
for a supposed pain in his liver. He did not even understand the meaning of the subterfuge. Dr.
Alirio Noguera had arrived in Macondo a few years before with a medicine chest of tasteless pills
and a medical motto that convinced no one: One nail draws another. In reality he was a charlatan.
Behind his innocent façade of a doctor without prestige there was hidden a terrorist who with his
short legged boots covered the scars that five years in the stocks had left on his legs. Taken prisoner
during the first federalist adventure, he managed to escape to Curaçao disguised in the garment he
detested most in this world: a cassock. At the end of a prolonged exile, stirred up by the exciting
news that exiles from all over the Caribbean brought to Curaçao, he set out in a smuggler’s schooner
and appeared in Riohacha with the bottles of pills that were nothing but refined sugar and a diploma
from the University of Leipzig that he had forged himself. He wept with disappointment. The fed-
eralist fervor, which the exiles had pictured as a powder keg about to explode, had dissolved into a
vague electoral illusion. Embittered by failure, yearning for a safe place where he could await old age,
the false homeopath took refuge in Macondo. In the narrow bottle-crowded room that he rented on
one side of the square, he lived several years off the hopelessly ill who, after having tried everything,
consoled themselves with sugar pills. His instincts of an agitator remained dormant as long as Don
Apolinar Moscote was a figurehead. He passed the time remembering and fighting against asthma.
The approach of the elections was the thread that led him once more to the skein of subversion. He
made contact with the young people in the town, who lacked political knowledge, and he embarked
on a stealthy campaign of instigation. The numerous red ballots that appeared is the box and that
were attributed by Don Apolinar Moscote to the curiosity that came from youth were part of his
plan: he made his disciples vote in order to show them that elections were a farce. “The only
effective thing,” he would say, “is violence.” The majority of Aureliano’s friends were enthusiastic
over the idea of liquidating the Conservative establishment, but no one had dared include him in the
plans, not only because of his ties with the magistrate, but because of his solitary and elusive
character. It was known, furthermore, that he had voted blue at his father-in-law’s direction. So it
was a simple matter of chance that he revealed his political sentiments, and it was purely a matter of
curiosity, a caprice, that brought him to visit the doctor for the treatment of a pain that he did not
have. In the den that smelled of camphorated cobwebs he found himself facing a kind of dusty
iguana whose lungs whistled when he breathed. Before asking him any questions the doctor took
him to the window and examined the inside of his lower eyelid. “It’s not there,” Aureliano said,
following what they told him. He pushed the tips of his fingers into his liver and added: “Here’s
where I have the pain that won’t let me sleep.” Then Dr. Noguera closed the window with the
pretext that there was too much sun, and explained to him in simple terms that it was a patriotic
duty to assassinate Conservatives. For several days Aureliano carried a small bottle of pills in his


shirt pocket. He would take it out every two hours, put three pills in the palm of his hand, and pop
them into his mouth for them to be slowly dissolved on his tongue. Don Apolinar Moscote made
fun of his faith in homeopathy, but those who were in on the plot recognized another one of their
people in him. Almost all of the sons of the founders were implicated, although none of them knew
concretely what action they were plotting. Nevertheless, the day the doctor revealed the secret to
Aureliano, the latter elicited the whole plan of the conspiracy. Although he was convinced at that
time of the urgency of liquidating the Conservative regime, the plot horrified him. Dr. Noguera had
a mystique of personal assassination. His system was reduced to coordinating a series of individual
actions which in one master stroke covering the whole nation would liquidate the functionaries of
the regime along with their respective families, especially the children, in order to exterminate
Conservatism at its roots. Don Apolinar Moscote, his wife, and his six daughters, needless to say,
were on the list.

“You’re no Liberal or anything else,” Aureliano told him without getting excited. “You’re nothing
but a butcher.”

“In that case,” the doctor replied with equal calm, “give me back the bottle. You don’t need it
any more.”

Only six months later did Aureliano learn that the doctor had given up on him as a man of action
because he was a sentimental person with no future, with a passive character, and a definite solitary
vocation. They tried to keep him surrounded, fearing that he would betray the conspiracy. Aureliano
calmed them down: he would not say a word, but on the night they went to murder the Moscote
family they would find him guarding the door. He showed such a convincing decision that the plan
was postponed for an indefinite date. It was during those days that Úrsula asked his opinion about
the marriage between Pietro Crespi and Amaranta, and he answered that these were not times to be
thinking about such a thing. For a week he had been carrying an old-fashioned pistol under his shirt.
He kept his eyes on his friends. In the afternoon he would go have coffee with José Arcadio and
Rebeca, who had begun to put their house in order, and from seven o’clock on he would play
dominoes with his father-in-law. At lunchtime he was chatting with Arcadio, who was already a huge
adolescent, and he found him more and more excited over the imminence of war. In school, where
Arcadio had pupils older than himself mixed in with children who were barely beginning to talk, the
Liberal fever had caught on. There was talk of shooting Father Nicanor, of turning the church into a
school, of instituting free love. Aureliano tried to calm down his drive. He recommended discretion
and prudence to him. Deaf to his calm reasoning, to his sense of reality, Arcadio reproached him in
public for his weakness of character. Aureliano waited. Finally, in the beginning of December,
Úrsula burst into the workshop all upset.

“War’s broken out!”

War, in fact, had broken out three months before. Martial law was in effect in the whole country.
The only one who knew it immediately was Don Apolinar Moscote, but he did not give the news
even to his wife while the army platoon that was to occupy the town by surprise was on its way.
They entered noiselessly before dawn, with two pieces of light artillery drawn by mules, and they set
up their headquarters in the school. A 6 P.M. curfew was established. A more drastic search than the
previous one was undertaken, house by house, and this time they even took farm implements. They
dragged out Dr. Noguera, tied him to a tree in the square, and shot him without any due process of
law. Father Nicanor tried to impress the military authorities with the miracle of levitation and had
his head split open by the butt of a soldier’s rifle. The Liberal exaltation had been extinguished into a
silent terror. Aureliano, pale, mysterious, continued playing dominoes with his father-in-law. He
understood that in spite of his present title of civil and military leader of the town, Don Apolinar
Moscote was once more a figurehead. The decisions were made by the army captain, who each
morning collected an extraordinary levy for the defense of public order. Four soldiers under his


command snatched a woman who had been bitten by a mad dog from her family and killed her with
their rifle butts. One Sunday, two weeks after the occupation, Aureliano entered Gerineldo
Márquez’s house and with his usual terseness asked for a mug of coffee without sugar. When the
two of them were alone in the kitchen, Aureliano gave his voice an authority that had never been
heard before. “Get the boys ready,” he said. “We’re going to war.” Gerineldo Márquez did not
believe him.

“With what weapons?” he asked.

“With theirs,” Aureliano replied.

Tuesday at midnight in a mad operation, twenty-one men under the age of thirty commanded by
Aureliano Buendía, armed with table knives and sharpened tools, took the garrison by surprise,
seized the weapons, and in the courtyard executed the captain and the four soldiers who had killed
the woman.

That same night, while the sound of the firing squad could be heard, Arcadio was named civil
and military leader of the town. The married rebels barely had time to take leave of their wives,
whom they left to their our devices. They left at dawn, cheered by the people who had been
liberated from the terror, to join the forces of the revolutionary general Victorio Medina, who,
according to the latest reports, was on his way to Manaure. Before leaving, Aureliano brought Don
Apolinar Moscote out of a closet. “Rest easy, father-in-law,” he told him. “The new government
guarantees on its word of honor your personal safety and that of your family.” Don Apolinar
Moscote had trouble identifying that conspirator in high boots and with a rifle slung over his
shoulder with the person he had played dominoes with until nine in the evening.

“This is madness, Aurelito,” he exclaimed.

“Not madness,” Aureliano said. “War. And don’t call me Aurelito any more. Now I’m Colonel
Aureliano Buendía.”


Chapter 6

COLONEL AURELIANO BUENDÍA organized thirty-two armed uprisings and he lost them all. He had
seventeen male children by seventeen different women and they were exterminated one after the
other on a single night before the oldest one had reached the age of thirty-five. He survived fourteen
attempts on his life, seventy-three ambushes, and a firing squad. He lived through a dose of
strychnine in his coffee that was enough to kill a horse. He refused the Order of Merit, which the
President of the Republic awarded him. He rose to be Commander in Chief of the revolutionary
forces, with jurisdiction and command from one border to the other, and the man most feared by
the government, but he never let himself be photographed. He declined the lifetime pension offered
him after the war and until old age he made his living from the little gold fishes that he
manufactured in his workshop in Macondo. Although he always fought at the head of his men, the
only wound that he received was the one he gave himself after signing the Treaty of Neerlandia,
which put an end to almost twenty years of civil war. He shot himself in the chest with a pistol and
the bullet came out through his back without damaging any vital organ. The only thing left of all that
was a street that bore his name in Macondo. And yet, as he declared a few years before he died of
old age, he had not expected any of that on the dawn he left with his twenty-one men to join the
forces of General Victorio Medina.

“We leave Macondo in your care.” was all that he said to Arcadio before leaving. “We leave it to
you in good shape, try to have it in better shape when we return.”

Arcadio gave a very personal interpretation to the instructions. He invented a uniform with the
braid and epaulets of a marshal, inspired by the prints in one of Melquíades’ books, and around his
waist he buckled the saber with gold tassels that had belonged to the executed captain. He set up the
two artillery pieces at the entrance to town, put uniforms on his former pupils, who had been
amused by his fiery proclamations, and let them wander through the streets armed in order to give
outsiders an impression of invulnerability. It was a double-edged deception, for the government did
not dare attack the place for ten months, but when it did it unleashed such a large force against it
that resistance was liquidated in a half hour. From the first day of his rule Arcadio revealed his
predilection for decrees. He would read as many as four a day in order to decree and institute
everything that came into his head. He imposed obligatory military service for men over eighteen,
declared to be public property any animals walking the streets after six in the evening, and made
men who were overage wear red armbands. He sequestered Father Nicanor in the parish house
under pain of execution and prohibited him from saying mass or ringing the bells unless it was for a
Liberal victory. In order that no one would doubt the severity of his aims, he ordered a firing squad
organized in the square and had it shoot at a scarecrow. At first no one took him seriously. They
were, after all, schoolchildren playing at being grown-ups. But one night, when Arcadio went into
Catarino’s store, the trumpeter in the group greeted him with a fanfare that made the customers
laugh and Arcadio had him shot for disrespect for the authorities. People who protested were put on
bread and water with their ankles in a set of stocks that he had set up in a schoolroom. “You
murderer!” Úrsula would shout at him every time she learned of some new arbitrary act. “When
Aureliano finds out he’s going to shoot you and I’ll be the first one to be glad.” But it was of no use.
Arcadio continued tightening the tourniquet with unnecessary rigor until he became the cruelest
ruler that Macondo had ever known. “Now let them suffer the difference,” Don Apolinar Moscote
said on one occasion. “This is the Liberal paradise.” Arcadio found out about it. At the head of a
patrol he assaulted the house, destroyed the furniture, flogged the daughters, and dragged out Don
Apolinar Moscote. When Úrsula burst into the courtyard of headquarters, after having gone through


the town shouting shame and brandishing with rage a pitch-covered whip, Arcadio himself was
preparing to give the squad the command to fire.

“I dare you to, bastard!” Úrsula shouted.

Before Arcadio had time to read she let go with the first blow of the lash. “I dare you to,
murderer!” she shouted. “And kill me too, son of an evil mother. That way I won’t have the eyes to
weep for the shame of having raised a monster.” Whipping him without mercy, she chased him to
the back of the courtyard, where Arcadio curled up like a snail in its shell. Don Apolinar Moscote
was unconscious, tied to the post where previously they had had the scarecrow that had been cut to
pieces by shots fired in fun. The boys in the squad scattered, fearful that Úrsula would go after them
too. But she did not even look at them. She left Arcadio with his uniform torn, roaring with pain
and rage, and she untied Don Apolinar Moscote and took him home. Before leaving the
headquarters she released the prisoners from the stocks.

From that time on she was the one who ruled in the town. She reestablished Sunday masses,
suspended the use of red armbands, and abrogated the harebrained decrees. But in spite of her
strength, she still wept over her unfortunate fate. She felt so much alone that she sought the useless
company of her husband, who had been forgotten under the chestnut tree. “Look what we’ve come
to,” she would tell him as the June rains threatened to knock the shelter down. “Look at the empty
house, our children scattered all over the world, and the two of us alone again, the same as in the
beginning.” José Arcadio Buendía, sunk in an abyss of unawareness, was deaf to her lamentations.
At the beginning of his madness he would announce his daily needs with urgent Latin phrases. In
fleeting clear spells of lucidity, when Amaranta would bring him his meals he would tell her what
bothered him most and would accept her sucking glasses and mustard plasters in a docile way. But at
the time when Úrsula went to lament by his side he had lost all contact with reality. She would bathe
him bit by bit as he sat on his stool while she gave him news of the family. “Aureliano went to war
more than four months ago and we haven’t heard anything about him,” she would say, scrubbing his
back with a soaped brush. “José Arcadio came back a big man, taller than you, and all covered with
needle-work, but he only brought shame to our house.” She thought she noticed, however, that her
husband would grow sad with the bad news. Then she decided to lie to him. ‘Rou won’t believe
what I’m going to tell you,” she said as she threw ashes over his excrement in order to pick it up
with the shovel. “God willed that José Arcadio and Rebeca should get married, and now they’re very
happy.” She got to be so sincere in the deception that she ended up by consoling herself with her
own lies. “Arcadio is a serious man now,” she said, “and very brave, and a fine-looking young man
with his uniform and saber.” It was like speaking to a dead man, for José Arcadio Buendía was
already beyond the reach of any worry. But she insisted. He seemed so peaceful, so indifferent to
everything that she decided to release him. He did not even move from his stool. He stayed there,
exposed to the sun and the rain, as if the thongs were unnecessary, for a dominion superior to any
visible bond kept him tied to the trunk of the chestnut tree. Toward August, when winter began to
last forever, Úrsula was finally able to give him a piece of news that sounded like the truth.

“Would you believe it that good luck is still pouring down on us?” she told him. “Amaranta and
the pianola Italian are going to get married.”

Amaranta and Pietro Crespi had, in fact, deepened their friendship, protected by Úrsula, who this
time did not think it necessary to watch over the visits. It was a twilight engagement. The Italian
would arrive at dusk, with a gardenia in his buttonhole, and he would translate Petrarch’s sonnets for
Amaranta. They would sit on the porch, suffocated by the oregano and the roses, he reading and she
sewing lace cuffs, indifferent to the shocks and bad news of the war, until the mosquitoes made
them take refuge in the parlor. Amaranta’s sensibility, her discreet but enveloping tenderness had
been wearing an invisible web about her fiancé, which he had to push aside materially with his pale
and ringless fingers in order to leave the house at eight o’clock. They had put together a delightful


album with the postcards that Pietro Crespi received from Italy. They were pictures of lovers in
lonely parks, with vignettes of hearts pierced with arrows and golden ribbons held by doves. “I’ve
been to this park in Florence,” Pietro Crespi would say, going through the cards. “A person can put
out his hand and the birds will come to feed.” Sometimes, over a watercolor of Venice, nostalgia
would transform the smell of mud and putrefying shellfish of the canals into the warm aroma of
flowers. Amaranta would sigh, laugh, and dream of a second homeland of handsome men and
beautiful women who spoke a childlike language with ancient cities of whose past grandeur only the
cats among the rubble remained. After crossing the ocean in search of it, after having confused
passion with the vehement stroking of Rebeca, Pietro Crespi had found love. Happiness was
accompanied by prosperity. His warehouse at that time occupied almost a whole block and it was a
hothouse of fantasy, with reproductions of the bell tower of Florence that told time with a concert
of carillons, and music boxes from Sorrento and compacts from China that sang five-note melodies
when they were opened, and all the musical instruments imaginable and all the mechanical toys that
could be conceived. Bruno Crespi, his younger brother, was in charge of the store because Pietro
Crespi barely had enough time to take care of the music school. Thanks to him the Street of the
Turks, with its dazzling display of knickknacks, became a melodic oasis where one could forget
Arcadio’s arbitrary acts and the distant nightmare of the war. When Úrsula ordered the revival of
Sunday mass, Pietro Crespi donated a German harmonium to the church, organized a children’s
chorus, and prepared a Gregorian repertory that added a note of splendor to Father Nicanor’s quiet
rite. No one doubted that he would make Amaranta a fortunate mate. Not pushing their feelings,
letting themselves be borne along by the natural flow of their hearth they reached a point where all
that was left to do was set a wedding date. They did not encounter any obstacles. Úrsula accused
herself inwardly of having twisted Rebecca’s destiny with repeated postponements and she was not
about to add more remorse. The rigor of the mourning for Remedios had been relegated to the
background by the mortifications of the war, Aureliano’s absence, Arcadio’s brutality, and the
expulsion of José Arcadio and Rebeca. With the imminence of the wedding, Pietro Crespi had
hinted that Aureliano José, in whom he had stirred up a love that was almost filial, would be
considered their oldest child. Everything made Amaranta think that she was heading toward a
smooth happiness. But unlike Rebeca, she did not reveal the slightest anxiety. With the same
patience with which she dyed tablecloths, sewed lace masterpieces, and embroidered needlepoint
peacocks, she waited for Pietro Crespi to be unable to bear the urges of his heart and more. Her day
came with the ill-fated October rains. Pietro Crespi took the sewing basket from her lap and he told
her, “We’ll get married next month.” Amaranta did not tremble at the contact with his icy hands.
She withdrew hers like a timid little animal and went back to her work.

“Don’t be simple, Crespi.” She smiled. “I wouldn’t marry you even if I were dead.”

Pietro Crespi lost control of himself. He wept shamelessly, almost breaking his fingers with
desperation, but he could not break her down. “Don’t waste your time,” was all that Amaranta said.
“If you really love me so much, don’t set foot in this house again.” Úrsula thought she would go
mad with shame. Pietro Crespi exhausted all manner of pleas. He went through incredible extremes
of humiliation. He wept one whole afternoon in Úrsula’s lap and she would have sold her soul in
order to comfort him. On rainy nights he could be seen prowling about the house with an umbrella,
waiting for a light in Amaranta’s bedroom. He was never better dressed than at that time. His august
head of a tormented emperor had acquired a strange air of grandeur. He begged Amaranta’s friends,
the ones who sewed with her on the porch, to try to persuade her. He neglected his business. He
would spend the day in the rear of the store writing wild notes, which he would send to Amaranta
with flower petals and dried butterflies, and which she would return unopened. He would shut
himself up for hours on end to play the zither. One night he sang. Macondo woke up in a kind of
angelic stupor that was caused by a zither that deserved more than this world and a voice that led


one to believe that no other person on earth could feel such love. Pietro Crespi then saw the lights
go on in every window in town except that of Amaranta. On November second, All Souls’ Day, his
brother opened the store and found all the lamps lighted, all the music boxes opened, and all the
docks striking an interminable hour, and in the midst of that mad concert he found Pietro Crespi at
the desk in the rear with his wrists cut by a razor and his hands thrust into a basin of benzoin.

Úrsula decreed that the wake would be in her house. Father Nicanor was against a religious
ceremony and burial in consecrated ground. Úrsula stood up to him. “In a way that neither you nor
I can understand, that man was a saint,” she said. “So I am going to bury him, against your wishes,
beside Melquíades’ grave.” She did it with the support of the whole town and with a magnificent
funeral. Amaranta did not leave her bedroom. From her bed she heard Úrsula’s weeping, the steps
and whispers of the multitude that invaded the house, the wailing of the mourners, and then a deep
silence that smelled of trampled flowers. For a long time she kept on smelling Pietro Crespi’s
lavender breath at dusk, but she had the strength not to succumb to delirium. Úrsula abandoned her.
She did not even raise her eyes to pity her on the afternoon when Amaranta went into the kitchen
and put her hand into the coals of the stove until it hurt her so much that she felt no more pain but
instead smelled the pestilence of her own singed flesh. It was a stupid cure for her remorse. For
several days she went about the house with her hand in a pot of egg whites, and when the burns
healed it appeared as if the whites had also scarred over the sores on her heart. The only external
trace that the tragedy left was the bandage of black gauze that she put on her burned hand and that
she wore until her death.

Arcadio gave a rare display of generosity by decreeing official mourning for Pietro Crespi. Úrsula
interpreted it as the return of the strayed lamb. But she was mistaken. She had lost Arcadio, not
when he had put on his military uniform, but from the beginning. She thought she had raised him as
a son, as she had raised Rebeca, with no privileges or discrimination. Nevertheless, Arcadio was a
solitary and frightened child during the insomnia plague, in the midst of Úrsula’s utilitarian fervor,
during the delirium of José Arcadio Buendía, the hermetism of Aureliano, and the mortal rivalry
between Amaranta and Rebeca. Aureliano had taught him to read and write, thinking about other
things, as he would have done with a stranger. He gave him his clothing so that Visitación could take
it in when it was ready to be thrown away. Arcadio suffered from shoes that were too large, from his
patched pants, from his female buttocks. He never succeeded in communicating with anyone better
than he did with Visitación and Cataure in their language. Melquíades was the only one who really
was concerned with him as he made him listen to his incomprehensible texts and gave him lessons
in the art of daguerreotype. No one imagined how much he wept in secret and the desperation with
which he tried to revive Melquíades with the useless study of his papers. The school, where they
paid attention to him and respected him, and then power, with his endless decrees and his glorious
uniform, freed him from the weight of an old bitterness. One night in Catarino’s store someone
dared tell him, “you don’t deserve the last name you carry.” Contrary to what everyone expected,
Arcadio did not have him shot.

“To my great honor,” he said, “I am not a Buendía.”

Those who knew the secret of his parentage thought that the answer meant that he too was
aware of it, but he had really never been. Pilar Ternera, his mother, who had made his blood boil in
the darkroom, was as much an irresistible obsession for him as she had been first for José Arcadio
and then for Aureliano. In spite of her having lost her charms and the splendor of her laugh, he
sought her out and found her by the trail of her smell of smoke. A short time before the war, one
noon when she was later than usual in coming for her younger son at school, Arcadio was waiting
for her in the room where he was accustomed to take his siesta and where he later set up the stocks.
While the child played in the courtyard, he waited in his hammock, trembling with anxiety, knowing
that Pillar Ternera would have to pass through there. She arrived. Arcadio grabbed her by the wrist


and tried to pull her into the hammock. “I can’t, I can’t,” Pilar Ternera said in horror. “You can’t
imagine how much I would like to make you happy, but as God is my witness I can’t.” Arcadio took
her by the waist with his tremendous hereditary strength and he felt the world disappear with the
contact of her skin. “Don’t play the saint,” he said. “After all, everybody knows that you’re a
whore.” Pilar overcame the disgust that her miserable fate inspired in her.

“The children will find out,” she murmured. “It will be better if you leave the bar off the door
tonight.”

Arcadio waited for her that night trembling with fever in his hammock. He waited without
sleeping, listening to the aroused crickets in the endless hours of early morning and the implacable
telling of time by the curlews, more and more convinced that he had been deceived. Suddenly, when
anxiety had broken down into rage, the door opened. A few months later, facing the firing squad,
Arcadio would relive the wandering steps in the classroom, the stumbling against benches, and
finally the bulk of a body in the shadows of the room and the breathing of air that was pumped by a
heart that was not his. He stretched out his hand and found another hand with two rings on the
same finger about to go astray in the darkness. He felt the structure of the veins, the pulse of its
misfortune, and felt the damp palm with a lifeline cut off at the base of the thumb by the claws of
death. Then he realized that this was not the woman he was waiting for, because she did not smell of
smoke but of flower lotion, and she had inflated, blind breasts with nipples like. a man’s, a sex as
stony and round as a nut, and the chaotic tenderness of excited inexperience. She was a virgin and
she had the unlikely name of Santa Sofía de la Piedad. Pilar Ternera had paid her fifty pesos, half of
her life savings, to do what she was doing. Arcadio, had seen her many times working in her parents’
small food store but he had never taken a good look at her because she had that rare virtue of never
existing completely except at the opportune moment. But from that day on he huddled like a cat in
the warmth of her armpit She would go to the school at siesta time with the consent of her parents,
to whom Pilar Ternera hid paid the other half of her savings. Later on, when the government troops
dislodged them from the place where they had made love, they did it among the cans of lard and
sacks of corn in the back of the store. About the time that Arcadio was named civil and military
leader they had a daughter.

The only relatives who knew about it were José Arcadio and Rebeca, with whom Arcadio
maintained close relations at that time, based not so much on kinship as on complicity. José Arcadio
had put his neck into the marital yoke. Rebeca’s firm character, the voracity of her stomach, her
tenacious ambition absorbed the tremendous energy of her husband, who had been changed from a
lazy, woman-chasing man into an enormous work animal. They kept a clean and neat house. Rebeca
would open it wide at dawn and the wind from the graveyard would come in through the windows
and go out through the doors to the yard and leave the whitewashed walls and furniture tanned by
the saltpeter of the dead. Her hunger for earth, the cloc-cloc of her parents’ bones, the impatience of
her blood as it faced Pietro Crespi’s passivity were relegated to the attic of her memory. All day long
she would embroider beside the window, withdrawn from the uneasiness of the war, until the
ceramic pots would begin to vibrate in the cupboard and she would get up to warm the meal, much
before the appearance, first, of the mangy hounds, and then of the colossus in leggings and spurs
with a double-barreled shotgun, who sometimes carried a deer on his shoulder and almost always a
string of rabbits or wild ducks. One afternoon, at the beginning of his rule, Arcadio paid them a
surprise visit. They had not seen him since they had left the house, but he seemed so friendly and
familiar that they invited him to share the stew.

Only when they were having coffee did Arcadio reveal the motive behind his visit: he had
received a complaint against José Arcadio. It was said that he had begun by plowing his own yard
and had gone straight ahead into neighboring lands, knocking down fences and buildings with his
oxen until he took forcible possession of the best plots of land around. On the peasants whom he


had not despoiled because he was not interested in their lands, he levied a contribution which he
collected every Saturday with his hunting dogs and his double-barreled shotgun. He did not deny it.
He based his right on the fact that the usurped lands had been distributed by José Arcadio Buendía
at the time of the founding, and he thought it possible to prove that his father had been crazy ever
since that time, for he had disposed of a patrimony that really belonged to the family. It was an
unnecessary allegation, because Arcadio had not come to do justice. He simply offered to set up a
registry office so that José Arcadio could legalize his title to the usurped land, under the condition
that he delegate to the local government the right to collect the contributions. They made an
agreement. Years later, when Colonel Aureliano Buendía examined the titles to property, he found
registered in his brother’s name all of the land between the hill where his yard was on up to the
horizon, including the cemetery, and discovered that during the eleven months of his rule, Arcadio
had collected not only the money of the contributions, but had also collected fees from people for
the right to bury their dead in José Arcadio’s land.

It took Úrsula several months to find out what was already public knowledge because people hid
it from her so as not to increase her suffering. At first she suspected it. “Arcadio is building a
house,” she confided with feigned pride to her husband as she tried to put a spoonful of calabash
syrup into his mouth. Nevertheless, she involuntarily sighed and said, “I don’t know why, but all this
has a bad smell to me.” Later on, when she found out that Arcadio had not only built a house but
had ordered some Viennese furniture, she confirmed her suspicion that he was using public funds.
“You’re the shame of our family name,” she shouted at him one Sunday after mass when she saw
him in his new house playing cards with his officers. Arcadio paid no attention to her. Only then did
Úrsula know that he had a six-month-old daughter and that Santa Sofía de la Piedad, with whom he
was living outside of marriage, was pregnant again. She decided to write to Colonel Aureliano
Buendía, wherever he was, to bring him up to date on the situation. But the fast-moving events of
those days not only prevented her plans from being carried out, they made her regret having
conceived them. The war, which until then had been only a word to designate a vague and remote
circumstance, became a concrete and dramatic reality. Around the end of February an old woman
with an ashen look arrived in Macondo riding a donkey loaded down with brooms. She seemed so
inoffensive that the sentries let her pass without any questions as another vendor, one of the many
who often arrived from the towns in the swamp. She went directly to the barracks. Arcadio received
her in the place where the classroom used to be and which at that time had been transformed into a
kind of rearguard encampment, with roiled hammocks hanging on hooks and mats piled up in the
corners, and rifles and carbines and even hunting shotguns scattered on the floor. The old woman
stiffened into a military salute before identifying herself:

“I am Colonel Gregorio Stevenson.”

He brought bad news. The last centers of Liberal resistance, according to what he said, were
being wiped out. Colonel Aureliano Buendía, whom he had left fighting in retreat near Riohacha,
had given him a message for Arcadio. He should surrender the town without resistance on the
condition that the lives and property of Liberals would be respected. Arcadio examined that strange
messenger who could have been a fugitive grandmother with a look of pity.

“You have brought something in writing, naturally,” he said.

“Naturally,” the emissary answered, “I have brought nothing of the sort. It’s easy to understand
that under the present circumstances a person can’t carry anything that would compromise him.”

As he was speaking he reached into his bodice and took out a small gold fish. “I think that this
will be sufficient,” he said. Arcadio could see that indeed it was one of the little fishes made by
Colonel Aureliano Buendía. But anyone could have bought it before the war or stolen it, and it had
no merit as a safe-conduct pass. The messenger even went to the extreme of violating a military
secret so that they would believe his identity. He revealed that he was on a mission to Curaçao,


where he hoped to recruit exiles from all over the Caribbean and acquire arms and supplies
sufficient to attempt a landing at the end of the year. With faith in that plan, Colonel Aureliano
Buendía was not in favor of any useless sacrifices at that time. But Arcadio was inflexible. He had
the prisoner put into the stocks until he could prove his identity and he resolved to defend the town
to the death.

He did not have long to wait. The news of the Liberal defeat was more and more concrete.
Toward the end of March, before a dawn of premature rain, the tense calm of the previous weeks
was abruptly broken by the desperate sounds of a cornet and a cannon shot that knocked down the
steeple of the church. Actually, Arcadio’s decision to resist was madness. He had only fifty poorly
armed men with a ration of twenty cartridges apiece. But among them, his former pupils, excited by
the high-sounding proclamations, the determination reigned to sacrifice their skins for a lost cause.
In the midst of the tramping of boots, contradictory commands, cannon shots that made the earth
tremble, wild shooting, and the senseless sound of cornets, the supposed Colonel Stevenson
managed to speak to Arcadio. “Don’t let me undergo the indignity of dying in the stocks in these
women’s clothes,” he said to him. “If I have to die, let me die fighting.” He succeeded in convincing
him. Arcadio ordered them to give him a weapon and twenty cartridges, and he left him with five
men to defend headquarters while he went off with his staff to head up the resistance. He did not
get to the road to the swamp. The barricades had been broken and the defenders were openly
fighting in the streets, first until they used up their ration of rifle bullets, then with pistols against
rifles, and finally hand to hand. With the imminence of defeat, some women went into the street
armed with sticks and kitchen knives. In that confusion Arcadio found Amaranta, who was looking
for him like a madwoman, in her nightgown and with two old pistols that had belonged to José
Arcadio Buendía. He gave his rifle to an officer who had been disarmed in the fight and escaped
with Amaranta through a nearby street to take her home. Úrsula was, in the doorway waiting,
indifferent to the cannon shots that had opened up a hole in the front of the house next door. The
rain was letting up, but the streets were as slippery and as smooth as melted soap, and one had to
guess distances in the darkness. Arcadio left Amaranta with Úrsula and made an attempt to face two
soldiers who had opened up with heavy firing from the corner. The old pistols that had been kept
for many years in the bureau did not work. Protecting Arcadio with her body, Úrsula tried to drag
him toward the house.

“Come along in the name of God,” she shouted at him. “There’s been enough madness!”

The soldiers aimed at them.

“Let go of that man, ma’am,” one of them shouted, “or we won’t be responsible!”

Arcadio pushed Úrsula toward the house and surrendered. A short time later the shooting
stopped and the bells began to toll. The resistance had been wiped out in less than half an hour. Not
a single one of Arcadio’s men had survived the attack, but before dying they had killed three
hundred soldiers. The last stronghold was the barracks. Before being attacked, the supposed Colonel
Gregorio Stevenson had freed the prisoners and ordered his men to go out and fight in the street.
The extraordinary mobility and accurate aim with which he placed his twenty cartridges gave the
impression that the barracks was well-defended, and the attackers blew it to pieces with cannon fire.
The captain who directed the operation was startled to find the rubble deserted and a single dead
man in his undershorts with an empty rifle still clutched in an arm that had been blown completely
off. He had a woman’s full head of hair held at the neck with a comb and on his neck a chain with a
small gold fish. When he turned him over with the tip of his boot and put the light on his face, the
captain was perplexed. “Jesus Christ,” he exclaimed. Other officers came over.

“Look where this fellow turned up,” the captain said. “It’s Gregorio Stevenson.”

At dawn, after a summary court martial, Arcadio was shot against the wall of the cemetery. In the
last two hours of his life he did not manage to understand why the fear that had tormented him


since childhood had disappeared. Impassive. without even worrying about making a show of his
recent bravery, he listened to the interminable charges of the accusation. He thought about Úrsula,
who at that hour must have been under the chestnut tree having coffee with José Arcadio Buendía.
He thought about his eight-month-old daughter, who still had no name, and about the child who
was going to be born in August. He thought about Santa Sofía de la Piedad, whom he had left the
night before salting down a deer for next day’s lunch, and he missed her hair pouring over her
shoulders and her eyelashes, which looked as if they were artificial. He thought about his people
without sentimentality, with a strict dosing of his accounts with life, beginning to understand how
much he really loved the people he hated most. The president of the court-martial began his final
speech when Arcadio realized that two hours had passed. “Even if the proven charges did not have
merit enough,” the president was saying, “the irresponsible and criminal boldness with which the
accused drove his subordinates on to a useless death would be enough to deserve capital
punishment.” In the shattered schoolhouse where for the first time he had felt the security of power,
a few feet from the room where he had come to know the uncertainty of love, Arcadio found the
formality of death ridiculous. Death really did not matter to him but life did, and therefore the
sensation he felt when they gave their decision was not a feeling of fear but of nostalgia. He did not
speak until they asked him for his last request.

“Tell my wife,” he answered in a well-modulated voice, “to give the girl the name of Úrsula.” He
paused and said it again: “Úrsula, like her grandmother. And tell her also that if the child that is to be
born is a boy, they should name him José Arcadio, not for his uncle, but for his grandfather.”

Before they took him to the execution wall Father Nicanor tried to attend him. “I have nothing
to repent,” Arcadio said, and he put himself under the orders of the squad after drinking a cup of
black coffee. The leader of the squad, a specialist in summary executions, had a name that had much
more about it than chance: Captain Roque Carnicero, which meant butcher. On the way to the
cemetery, under the persistent drizzle, Arcadio saw that a radiant Wednesday was breaking out on
the horizon. His nostalgia disappeared with the mist and left an immense curiosity in its place. Only
when they ordered him to put his back to the wall did Arcadio see Rebeca, with wet hair and a pink
flowered dress, opening wide the door. He made an effort to get her to recognize him. And Rebeca
did take a casual look toward the wall and was paralyzed with stupor, barely able to react and wave
good-bye to Arcadio. Arcadio answered her the same way. At that instant the smoking mouths of
the rifles were aimed at him and letter by letter he heard the encyclicals that Melquíades had chanted
and he heard the lost steps of Santa Sofía de la Piedad, a virgin, in the classroom, and in his nose he
felt the same icy hardness that had drawn his attention in the nostrils of the corpse of Remedios.
“Oh, God damn it!” he managed to think. “I forgot to say that if it was a girl they should name her
Remedios.” Then, all accumulated in the rip of a claw, he felt again all the terror that had tormented
him in his life. The captain gave the order to fire. Arcadio barely had time to put out his chest and
raise his head, not understanding where the hot liquid that burned his thighs was pouring from.

“Bastards!” he shouted. “Long live the Liberal Party!”


Chapter 7

THE WAR was over in May. Two weeks before the government made the official announcement in a
high-sounding proclamation, which promised merciless punishment for those who had started the
rebellion, Colonel Aureliano Buendía fell prisoner just as he was about to reach the western frontier
disguised as an Indian witch doctor. Of the twenty-one men who had followed him to war, fourteen
fell in combat, six were wounded, and only one accompanied him at the moment of final defeat:
Colonel Gerineldo Márquez. The news of his capture was announced in Macondo with a special
proclamation. “He’s alive,” Úrsula told her husband. “Let’s pray to God for his enemies to show
him clemency.” After three days of weeping, one afternoon as she was stirring some sweet milk
candy in the kitchen she heard her son’s voice clearly in her ear. “It was Aureliano, “ she shouted,
running toward the chestnut tree to tell her husband the news. “I don’t know how the miracle took
place, but he’s alive and we’re going to see him very soon.” She took it for granted. She had the
floors of the house scrubbed and changed the position of the furniture. One week later a rumor
from somewhere that was not supported by any proclamation gave dramatic confirmation to the
prediction. Colonel Aureliano Buendía had been condemned to death and the sentence would be
carried out in Macondo as a lesson to the population. On Monday, at ten-thirty in the morning,
Amaranta was dressing Aureliano José when she heard the sound of a distant troop and the blast of
a cornet one second before Úrsula burst into the room with the shout: “They’re bringing him now!”
The troop struggled to subdue the overflowing crowd with their rifle butts. Úrsula and Amaranta
ran to the corner, pushing their way through, and then they saw him. He looked like a beggar. His
clothing was torn, his hair and beard were tangled, and he was barefoot. He was walking without
feeling the burning dust, his hands tied behind his back with a rope that a mounted officer had
attached to the head of his horse. Along with him, also ragged and defeated, they were bringing
Colonel Gerineldo Márquez. They were not sad. They seemed more disturbed by the crowd that was
shouting all kinds of insults at the troops.

“My son!” Úrsula shouted in the midst of the uproar, and she slapped the soldier who tried to
hold her back. The officer’s horse reared. Then Colonel Aureliano Buendía stopped, tremulous,
avoided the arms of his mother, and fixed a stern look on her eyes.

“Go home, Mama,” he said. “Get permission from the authorities to come see me in jail.”

He looked at Amaranta, who stood indecisively two steps behind Úrsula, and he smiled as he
asked her, “What happened to your hand?” Amaranta raised the hand with the black bandage. “A
burn,” she said, and took Úrsula away so that the horses would not run her down. The troop took
off. A special guard surrounded the prisoners and took them to the jail at a trot.

At dusk Úrsula visited Colonel Aureliano Buendía in jail. She had tried to get permission through
Don Apolinar Moscote, but he had lost all authority in the face of the military omnipotence. Father
Nicanor was in bed with hepatic fever. The parents of Colonel Gerineldo Márquez, who had not
been condemned to death, had tried to see him and were driven off with rifle butts. Facing the
impossibility of finding anyone to intervene, convinced that her son would be shot at dawn, Úrsula
wrapped up the things she wanted to bring him and went to the jail alone.

“I am the mother of Colonel Aureliano Buendía,” she announced.

The sentries blocked her way. “I’m going in in any case,” Úrsula warned them. “So if you have
orders to shoot, start right in.” She pushed one of them aside and went into the former classroom,
where a group of half-dressed soldiers were oiling their weapons. An officer in a field uniform,
ruddy-faced, with very thick glasses and ceremonious manners, signaled to the sentries to withdraw.

“I am the mother of Colonel Aureliano Buendía,” Úrsula repeated.


“You must mean,” the officer corrected with a friendly smile, “that you are the mother of Mister
Aureliano Buendía.” Úrsula recognized in his affected way of speaking the languid cadence of the
stuck-up people from the highlands.

“As you say, mister,” she accepted, “just as long as I can see him.”

There were superior orders that prohibited visits to prisoners condemned to death, but the
officer assumed the responsibility of letting her have a fifteen-minute stay. Úrsula showed him what
she had in the bundle: a change of clean clothing, the short boots that her son had worn at his
wedding, and the sweet milk candy that she had kept for him since the day she had sensed his
return. She found Colonel Aureliano Buendía in the room that was used as a cell, lying on a cot with
his arms spread out because his armpits were paved with sores. They had allowed him to shave. The
thick mustache with twisted ends accentuated the sharp angles of his cheekbones. He looked paler
to Úrsula than when he had left, a little taller, and more solitary than ever. He knew all about the
details of the house: Pietro Crespi’s suicide, Arcadio’s arbitrary acts and execution. the dauntlessness
of José Arcadio Buendía underneath the chestnut tree. He knew that Amaranta had consecrated her
virginal widowhood to the rearing of Aureliano José and that the latter was beginning to show signs
of quite good judgment and that he had learned to read and write at the same time he had learned to
speak. From the moment In which she entered the room Úrsula felt inhibited by the maturity of her
son, by his aura of command, by the glow of authority that radiated from his skin. She was surprised
that he was so well-informed. “You knew all along that I was a wizard,” he joked. And he added in a
serious tone, “This morning, when they brought me here, I had the impression that I had already
been through all that before.” In fact, while the crowd was roaring alongside him, he had been
concentrating his thoughts, startled at how the town had aged. The leaves of the almond trees were
broken. The houses, painted blue, then painted red, had ended up with an indefinable coloration.

“What did you expect?” Úrsula sighed. “Time passes.”

“That’s how it goes,” Aureliano admitted, “but not so much.”

In that way the long-awaited visit, for which both had prepared questions and had even
anticipated answers, was once more the usual everyday conversation. When the guard announced
the end of the visit, Aureliano took out a roll of sweaty papers from under the cot. They were his
poetry, the poems inspired by Remedios, which he had taken with him when he left, and those he
had written later on during chance pauses in the war. “Promise me that no one will read them,” he
said. “Light the oven with them this very night.” Úrsula promised and stood up to kiss him good-
bye.

“I brought you a revolver,” she murmured.

Colonel Aureliano Buendía saw that the sentry could not see. “It won’t do me any good,” he said
in a low voice, “but give it to me in case they search you on the way out.” Úrsula took the revolver
out of her bodice and put it under the mattress of the cot. “And don’t say good-bye,” he concluded
with emphatic calmness. “Don’t beg or bow down to anyone. Pretend that they shot me a long time
ago.” Úrsula bit her lip so as not to cry.

“Put some hot stones on those sores,” she said.

She turned halfway around and left the room. Colonel Aureliano Buendía remained standing,
thoughtful, until the door closed. Then he lay down again with his arms open. Since the beginning
of adolescence, when he had begun to be aware of his premonitions, he thought that death would be
announced with a definite, unequivocal, irrevocable signal, but there were only a few hours left
before he would die and the signal had not come. On a certain occasion a very beautiful woman had
come into his camp in Tucurinca and asked the sentries’ permission to see him. They let her through
because they were aware of the fanaticism of mothers, who sent their daughters to the bedrooms of
the most famous warriors, according to what they said, to improve the breed. That night Colonel
Aureliano Buendía was finishing the poem about the man who is lost in the rain when the girl came


into his room. He turned his back to her to put the sheet of paper into the locked drawer where he
kept his poetry. And then he sensed it. He grasped the pistol in the drawer without turning his head.

“Please don’t shoot,” he said.

When he turned around holding his Pistol, the girl had lowered hers and did not know what to
do. In that way he had avoided four out of eleven traps. On the other hand, someone who was
never caught entered the revolutionary headquarters one night in Manaure and stabbed to death his
close friend Colonel Magnífico Visbal, to whom he had given his cot so that he could sweat out a
fever. A few yards away, sleeping in a hammock in the same room. he was not aware of anything.
His efforts to systematize his premonitions were useless. They would come suddenly in a wave of
supernatural lucidity, like an absolute and momentaneous conviction, but they could not be grasped.
On occasion they were so natural that he identified them as premonitions only after they had been
fulfilled. Frequently they were nothing but ordinary bits of superstition. But when they condemned
him to death and asked him to state his last wish, he did not have the least difficulty in identifying
the premonition that inspired his answer.

“I ask that the sentence be carried out in Macondo,” he said.

The president of the court-martial was annoyed. “Don’t be clever, Buendía,” he told him.
“That’s just a trick to gain more time.”

“If you don’t fulfill it, that will be your worry.” the colonel said, “but that’s my last wish.”

Since then the premonitions had abandoned him. The day when Úrsula visited him in jail, after a
great deal of thinking he came to the conclusion that perhaps death would not be announced that
time because it did not depend on chance but on the will of his executioners. He spent the night
awake, tormented by the pain of his sores. A little before dawn he heard steps in the hallway.
“They’re coming,” he said to himself, and for no reason he thought of José Arcadio Buendía, who at
that moment was thinking about him under the dreary dawn of the chestnut tree. He did not feel
fear or nostalgia, but an intestinal rage at the idea that this artificial death would not let him see the
end of so many things that he had left unfinished. The door opened and a sentry came in with a mug
of coffee. On the following day at the same hour he would still be doing what he was then, raging
with the pain in his armpits, and the same thing happened. On Thursday he shared the sweet milk
candy with the guards and put on his clean clothes, which were tight for him, and the patent leather
boots. By Friday they had still not shot him.

Actually, they did not dare carry out the sentence. The rebelliousness of the town made the
military men think that the execution of Colonel Aureliano Buendía might have serious political
consequences not only in Macondo but throughout the area of the swamp, so they consulted the
authorities in the capital of the province. On Saturday night, while they were waiting for an answer
Captain Roque Carnicero went with some other officers to Catarino’s place. Only one woman,
practically threatened, dared take him to her room. “They don’t want to go to bed with a man they
know is going to die,” she confessed to him. “No one knows how it will come, but everybody is
going around saying that the officer who shoots Colonel Aureliano Buendía and all the soldiers in
the squad, one by one, will be murdered, with no escape, sooner or later, even if they hide at the
ends of the earth.” Captain Roque Carnicero mentioned it to the other officers and they told their
superiors. On Sunday, although no one had revealed it openly, although no action on the part of the
military had disturbed the tense calm of those days, the whole town knew that the officers were
ready to use any manner of pretext to avoid responsibility for the execution. The official order
arrived in the Monday mail: the execution was to be carried out within twenty-four hours. That night
the officers put seven slips of paper into a cap, and Captain Roque Carnicero’s unpeaceful fate was
foreseen by his name on the prize slip. “Bad luck doesn’t have any chinks in it,” he said with deep
bitterness. “I was born a son of a bitch and I’m going to die a son of a bitch.” At five in the morning


he chose the squad by lot, formed it in the courtyard, and woke up the condemned man with a
premonitory phrase.

“Let’s go, Buendía,” he told him. “Our time has come.”

“So that’s what it was,” the colonel replied. “I was dreaming that my sores had burst.”

Rebeca Buendía got up at three in the morning when she learned that Aureliano would be shot.
She stayed in the bedroom in the dark, watching the cemetery wall through the half-opened window
as the bed on which she sat shook with José Arcadio’s snoring. She had waited all week with the
same hidden persistence with which during different times she had waited for Pietro Crespi’s letters.
“They won’t shoot him here,” José Arcadio, told her. “They’ll shoot him at midnight in the barracks
so that no one will know who made up the squad, and they’ll bury him right there.” Rebeca kept on
waiting. “They’re stupid enough to shoot him here,” she said. She was so certain that she had
foreseen the way she would open the door to wave good-bye. “They won’t bring him through the
streets,” José Arcadio insisted, with six scared soldiers and knowing that the people are ready for
anything.” Indifferent to her husband’s logic, Rebeca stayed by the window.

“You’ll see that they’re just stupid enough,” she said.

On Tuesday, at five-in the. morning, José Arcadio had drunk his coffee and let the dogs out
when Rebeca closed the window and held onto the head of the bed so as not to fall down. “There,
they’re bringing him,” she sighed. “He’s so handsome.” José Arcadio looked out the window and
saw him. tremulous in the light of dawn. He already had his back to the wall and his hands were on
his hips because the burning knots in his armpits would not let him lower them. “A person fucks
himself up so much,” Colonel Aureliano Buendía said. “Fucks himself up so much just so that six
weak fairies can kill him and he can’t do anything about it.” He repeated it with so much rage that it
almost seemed to be fervor, and Captain Roque Carnicero was touched, because he thought he was
praying. When the squad took aim, the rage had materialized into a viscous and bitter substance that
put his tongue to sleep and made him close his eyes. Then the aluminum glow of dawn disappeared
and he saw himself again in short pants, wearing a tie around his neck, and he saw his father leading
him into the tent on a splendid afternoon, and he saw the ice. When he heard the shout he thought
that it was the final command to the squad. He opened his eyes with a shudder of curiosity,
expecting to meet the incandescent trajectory of the bullets, but he only saw Captain Roque
Carnicero with his arms in the air and José Arcadio crossing the street with his fearsome shotgun
ready to go off.

“Don’t shoot,” the captain said to José Arcadio. “You were sent by Divine Providence.”

Another war began right there. Captain Roque Carnicero and his six men left with Colonel
Aureliano Buendía to free the revolutionary general Victorio Medina, who had been condemned to
death in Riohacha. They thought they could save time by crossing the mountains along the trail that
José Arcadio Buendía had followed to found Macondo, but before a week was out they were
convinced that it was an impossible undertaking. So they had to follow the dangerous route over the
outcroppings; with no other munitions but what the firing squad had. They would camp near the
towns and one of them, with a small gold fish in his hand, would go in disguise in broad daylight to
contact the dormant Liberals, who would go out hunting on the following morning and never
return. When they saw Riohacha from a ridge in the mountains, General Victorio Medina had been
shot. Colonel Aureliano Buendía’s men proclaimed him chief of the revolutionary forces of the
Caribbean coast with the rank of general. He assumed the position but refused the promotion and
took the stand that he would never accept it as long as the Conservative regime was in power. At the
end of three months they had succeeded in arming more than a thousand men, but they were wiped
out. The survivors reached the eastern frontier. The next thing that was heard of them was that they
had landed on Cabo de la Vela, coming from the smaller islands of the Antilles, and a message from
the government was sent all over by telegraph and included in jubilant proclamations throughout the


country announcing the death of Colonel Aureliano Buendía. But two days later a multiple telegram
which almost overtook the previous one announced another uprising on the southern plains. That
was how the legend of the ubiquitous Colonel Aureliano Buendía, began. Simultaneous and
contradictory information declared him victorious in Villanueva. defeated in Guacamayal, devoured
by Motilón Indians, dead in a village in the swamp, and up in arms again in Urumita. The Liberal
leaders, who at that moment were negotiating for participation in the congress, branded him in
adventurer who did not represent the party. The national government placed him in the category of
a bandit and put a price of five thousand pesos on his head. After sixteen defeats, Colonel Aureliano
Buendía left Guajira with two thousand well-armed Indians and the garrison, which was taken by
surprise as it slept, abandoned Riohacha. He established his headquarters there and proclaimed total
war against the regime. The first message he received from the government was a threat to shoot
Colonel Gerineldo Márquez within forty-eight hours if he did not withdraw with his forces to the
eastern frontier. Colonel Roque Carnicero, who was his chief of staff then, gave him the telegram
with a look of consternation, but he read it with unforeseen joy.

“How wonderful!” he exclaimed. “We have a telegraph office in Macondo now.”

His reply was definitive. In three months he expected to establish his headquarters in Macondo.
If he did not find Colonel Gerineldo Márquez alive at that time he would shoot out of hand all of
the officers he held prisoner at that moment starting with the generals, and he would give orders to
his subordinates to do the same for the rest of the war. Three months later, when he entered
Macondo in triumph, the first embrace he received on the swamp road was that of Colonel Geri-
neldo Márquez.

The house was full of children. Úrsula had taken in Santa Sofía de la Piedad with her older
daughter and a pair of twins, who had been born five months after Arcadio had been shot. Contrary
to the victim’s last wishes, she baptized the girl with the name of Remedios. I’m sure that was what
Arcadio meant,” she alleged. “We won’t call her Úrsula, because a person suffers too much with that
name.” The twins were named José Arcadio Segundo and Aureliano Segundo. Amaranta took care
of them all. She put small wooden chairs in the living room and established a nursery with other
children from neighboring families. When Colonel Aureliano Buendía returned in the midst of
exploding rockets and ringing bells, a children’s chorus welcomed him to the house. Aureliano José,
tall like his grandfather, dressed as a revolutionary officer, gave him military honors.

Not all the news was good. A year after the flight of Colonel Aureliano Buendía, José Arcadio
and Rebeca went to live in the house Arcadio had built. No one knew about his intervention to halt
the execution. In the new house, located on the best corner of the square, in the shade of an almond
tree that was honored by three nests of redbreasts, with a large door for visitors and four windows
for light, they set up a hospitable home. Rebeca’s old friends, among them four of the Moscote
sisters who were still single, once more took up the sessions of embroidery that had been
interrupted years before on the porch with the begonias. José Arcadio continued to profit from the
usurped lands, the title to which was recognized by the Conservative government. Every afternoon
he could be seen returning on horseback, with his hunting dogs and his double-barreled shotgun and
a string of rabbits hanging from his saddle. One September afternoon, with the threat of a storm, he
returned home earlier than usual. He greeted Rebeca in the dining room, tied the dogs up in the
courtyard, hung the rabbits up in the kitchen to be salted later, and went to the bedroom to change
his clothes. Rebeca later declared that when her husband went into the bedroom she was locked in
the bathroom and did not hear anything. It was a difficult version to believe, but there was no other
more plausible, and no one could think of any motive for Rebeca to murder the man who had made
her happy. That was perhaps the only mystery that was never cleared up in Macondo. As soon as
José Arcadio closed the bedroom door the sound of a pistol shot echoed through the house. A
trickle of blood came out under the door, crossed the living room, went out into the street,


continued on in a straight line across the uneven terraces, went down steps and climbed over curbs,
passed along the Street of the Turks, turned a corner to the right and another to the left, made a
right angle at the Buendía house, went in under the closed door, crossed through the parlor, hugging
the walls so as not to stain the rugs, went on to the other living room, made a wide curve to avoid
the dining-room table, went along the porch with the begonias, and passed without being seen under
Amaranta’s chair as she gave an arithmetic lesson to Aureliano José , and went through the pantry
and came out in the kitchen, where Úrsula was getting ready to crack thirty-six eggs to make bread.

“Holy Mother of God!” Úrsula shouted.

She followed the thread of blood back along its course, and in search of its origin she went
through the pantry, along the begonia porch where Aureliano José was chanting that three plus three
is six and six plus three is nine, and she crossed the dining room and the living rooms and followed
straight down the street, and she turned first to the right and then to the left to the Street of the
Turks, forgetting that she was still wearing her baking apron and her house slippers, and she came
out onto the square and went into the door of a house where she had never been, and she pushed
open the bedroom door and was almost suffocated by the smell of burned gunpowder, and she
found José Arcadio lying face down on the ground on top of the leggings he had just taken off, and
she saw the starting point of the thread of blood that had already stopped flowing out of his right
ear. They found no wound on his body nor could they locate the weapon. Nor was it possible to
remove the smell of powder from the corpse. First they washed him three times with soap and a
scrubbing brush, and they rubbed him with salt and vinegar, then with ashes and lemon, and finally
they put him in a barrel of lye and let him stay for six hours. They scrubbed him so much that the
arabesques of his tattooing began to fade. When they thought of the desperate measure of seasoning
him with pepper, cumin seeds, and laurel leaves and boiling him for a whole day over a slow fire, he
had already begun to decompose and they had to bury him hastily. They sealed him hermetically in a
special coffin seven and a half feet long and four feet wide, reinforced inside with iron plates and
fastened together with steel bolts, and even then the smell could be perceived on the streets through
which the funeral procession passed. Father Nicanor, with his liver enlarged and tight as a drum,
gave him his blessing from bed. Although in the months that followed they reinforced the grave
with walls about it, between which they threw compressed ash, sawdust, and quicklime, the cemetery
still smelled of powder for many years after, until the engineers from the banana company covered
the grave over with a shell of concrete. As soon as they took the body out, Rebeca closed the doors
of her house and buried herself alive, covered with a thick crust of disdain that no earthly temptation
was ever able to break. She went out into the street on one occasion, when she was very old, with
shoes the color of old silver and a hat made of tiny flowers, during the time that the Wandering Jew
passed through town and brought on a heat wave that was so intense that birds broke through
window screens to come to die in the bedrooms. The last time anyone saw her alive was when with
one shot she killed a thief who was trying to force the door of her house. Except for Argénida, her
servant and confidante, no one ever had any more contact with her after that. At one time it was
discovered that she was writing letters to the Bishop, whom she claimed as a first cousin. but it was
never said whether she received any reply. The town forgot about her.

In spite of his triumphal return, Colonel Aureliano Buendía was not enthusiastic over the looks
of things. The government troops abandoned their positions without resistance and that aroused an
illusion of victory among the Liberal population that it was not right to destroy, but the
revolutionaries knew the truth, Colonel Aureliano Buendía better than any of them. Although at that
moment he had more than five thousand men under his command and held two coastal states, he
had the feeling of being hemmed in against the sea and caught in a situation that was so confused
that when he ordered the restoration of the church steeple, which had been knocked down by army
cannon fire, Father Nicanor commented from his sickbed: “This is silly; the defenders of the faith of


Christ destroy the church and the Masons order it rebuilt.” Looking for a loophole through which
he could escape, he spent hours on end in the telegraph office conferring with the commanders of
other towns, and every time he would emerge with the firmest impression that the war was at a
stalemate. When news of fresh liberal victories was received it was celebrated with jubilant
proclamations, but he would measure the real extent of them on the map and could see that his
forces were penetrating into the jungle, defending themselves against malaria and mosquitoes,
advancing in the opposite direction from reality. “We’re wasting time,” he would complain to his
officers. “We’re wasting time while the bastards in the party are begging for seats in congress.” Lying
awake at night, stretched out on his back in a hammock in the same room where he had awaited
death, he would evoke the image of lawyers dressed in black leaving the presidential palace in the icy
cold of early morning with their coat collars turned up about their ears, rubbing their hands, whis-
pering, taking refuge in dreary early-morning cafés to speculate over what the president had meant
when he said yes, or what he had meant when he said no, and even to imagine what the president
was thinking when he said something quite different, as he chased away mosquitoes at a temperature
of ninety-five degrees, feeling the approach of the fearsome dawn when he would have to give his
men the command to jump into the sea.

One night of uncertainty, when Pilar Ternera was singing in the courtyard with the soldiers, he
asked her to read the future in her cards. “Watch out for your mouth,” was all that Pilar Ternera
brought out after spreading and picking up the cards three times. “I don’t know what it means, but
the sign is very clear. Watch out for your mouth.” Two days later someone gave an orderly a mug of
black coffee and the orderly passed it on to someone else and that one to someone else until, hand
to hand, it reached Colonel Aureliano Buendía office. He had not asked for any coffee, but since it
was there the colonel drank it. It had a dose of nux vomica strong enough to kill a horse. When they
took him home he was stiff and arched and his tongue was sticking out between his teeth. Úrsula
fought against death over him. After cleaning out his stomach with emetics, she wrapped him in hot
blankets and fed him egg whites for two days until his harrowed body recovered its normal
temperature. On the fourth day he was out of danger. Against his will, pressured by Úrsula and his
officers, he stayed in bed for another week. Only then did he learn that his verses had not been
burned. “I didn’t want to be hasty,” Úrsula explained to him. “That night when I went to light the
oven I said to myself that it would be better to wait until they brought the body.” In the haze of
convalescence, surrounded by Remedios’ dusty dolls, Colonel Aureliano Buendía, brought back the
decisive periods of his existence by reading his poetry. He started writing again. For many hours,
balancing on the edge of the surprises of a war with no future, in rhymed verse he resolved his
experience on the shores of death. Then his thoughts became so clear that he was able to examine
them forward and backward. One night he asked Colonel Gerineldo Márquez:

“Tell me something, old friend: why are you fighting?”

“What other reason could there be?” Colonel Gerineldo Márquez answered. “For the great liberal
party.”

“You’re lucky because you know why,” he answered. “As far as I’m concerned, I’ve come to
realize only just now that I’m fighting because of pride.”

“That’s bad,” Colonel Gerineldo Márquez said. Colonel Aureliano Buendía was amused at his
alarm. “Naturally,” he said. “But in any case, it’s better than not knowing why you’re fighting.” He
looked him in the eyes and added with a smile:

“Or fighting, like you, for something that doesn’t have any meaning for anyone.”

His pride had prevented him from making contact with the armed groups in the interior of the
country until the leaders of the party publicly rectified their declaration that he was a bandit. He
knew, however, that as soon as he put those scruples aside he would break the vicious circle of the
war. Convalescence gave him time to reflect. Then he succeeded in getting Úrsula to give him the


rest of her buried inheritance and her substantial savings. He named Colonel Gerineldo Márquez
civil and military leader of Macondo and he went off to make contact with the rebel groups in the
interior.

Colonel Gerineldo Márquez was not only the man closest to Colonel Aureliano Buendía, but
Úrsula received him as a member of the family. Fragile, timid, with natural good manners, he was,
however, better suited for war than for government. His political advisers easily entangled him in
theoretical labyrinths, But he succeeded in giving Macondo the atmosphere of rural peace that
Colonel Aureliano, Buendía dreamed of so that he could die of old age making little gold fishes.
Although he lived in his parents’ house he would have lunch at Úrsula’s two or three times a week.
He initiated Aureliano José in the use of firearms, gave him early military instruction, and for several
months took him to live in the barracks, with Úrsula’s consent, so that he could become a man.
Many years before, when he was still almost a child, Gerineldo Márquez had declared his love for
Amaranta. At that time she was so illusioned with her lonely passion for Pietro Crespi that she
laughed at him. Gerineldo Márquez waited. On a certain occasion he sent Amaranta a note from jail
asking her to embroider a dozen batiste handkerchiefs with his father’s initials on them. He sent her
the money. A week later Amaranta, brought the dozen handkerchiefs to him in jail along with the
money and they spent several hours talking about the past. “When I get out of here I’m going to
marry you,” Gerineldo Márquez told her when she left. Amaranta laughed but she kept on thinking
about him while she taught the children to read and she tried to revive her juvenile passion for
Pietro Crespi. On Saturday, visiting days for the prisoners, she would stop by the house of
Gerineldo Márquez’s parents and accompany them to the jail. On one of those Saturdays Úrsula was
surprised to see her in the kitchen, waiting for the biscuits to come out of the oven so that she could
pick the best ones and cap them in a napkin that she had embroidered for the occasion.

“Marry him,” she told her. “You’ll have a hard time finding another man like him.”

Amaranta feigned a reaction of displeasure.

“I don’t have to go around hunting for men,” she answered. “I’m taking these biscuits to
Gerineldo because I’m sorry that sooner or later they’re going to shoot him.”

She said it without thinking, but that was the time that the government had announced its threat
to shoot Colonel Gerineldo Márquez if the rebel forces did not surrender Riohacha. The visits
stopped. Amaranta shut herself up to weep, overwhelmed by a feeling of guilt similar to the one that
had tormented her when Remedios died, as if once more her careless words had been responsible
for a death. Her mother consoled her. She inured her that Colonel Aureliano Buendía would do
something to prevent the execution and promised that she would take charge of attracting Gerineldo
Márquez herself when the war was over. She fulfilled her promise before the imagined time. When
Gerineldo Márquez returned to the house, invested with his new dignity of civil and military leader,
she received him as a son, thought of delightful bits of flattery to hold him there, and prayed with all
her soul that he would remember his plan to marry Amaranta. Her pleas seemed to be answered. On
the days that he would have lunch at the house, Colonel Gerineldo Márquez would linger on the
begonia porch playing Chinese checkers with Amaranta. Úrsula would bring them coffee and milk
and biscuits and would take over the children so that they would not bother them. Amaranta was
really making an effort to kindle in her heart the forgotten ashes of her youthful passion. With an
anxiety that came to be intolerable, she waited for the lunch days, the afternoons of Chinese
checkers, and time flew by in the company of the warrior with a nostalgic name whose fingers
trembled imperceptibly as he moved the pieces. But the day on which Colonel Gerineldo Márquez
repeated his wish to marry her, she rejected him.

“I’m not going to marry anyone,” she told him, “much less you. You love Aureliano so much
that you want to marry me because you can’t marry him.”


Colonel Gerineldo Márquez was a patient man. “I’ll keep on insisting,” he said. “Sooner or later
I’ll convince you.” He kept on visiting the house. Shut up in her bedroom biting back her secret
tears, Amaranta put her fingers in her ears so as not to bear the voice of the suitor as he gave Úrsula
the latest war news, and in spite of the fact that she was dying to see him she had the strength not to
go out and meet him.

At that time Colonel Aureliano Buendía took the time to send a detailed account to Macondo
every two weeks. But only once, almost eight months after he had left, did he write to Úrsula. A
special messenger brought a sealed envelope to the house with a sheet of paper inside bearing the
colonel’s delicate hand: Take good care of Papa because he is going to die. Úrsula became alarmed. “If
Aureliano says so it’s because Aureliano knows,” she said. And she had them help her take José
Arcadio Buendía to his bedroom. Not only was he as heavy as ever, but during his prolonged stay
under the chestnut tree he had developed the faculty of being able to increase his weight at will, to
such a degree that seven men were unable to lift him and they had to drag him to the bed. A smell
of tender mushrooms, of wood-flower fungus, of old and concentrated outdoors impregnated the
air of the bedroom as it was breathed by the colossal old man weather-beaten by the sun and the
rain. The next morning he was not in his bed. In spite of his undiminished strength, José Arcadio
Buendía was in no condition to resist. It was all the same to him. If he went back to the chestnut
tree it was not because he wanted to but because of a habit of his body. Úrsula took care of him, fed
him, brought him news of Aureliano. But actually, the only person with whom he was able to have
contact for a long time was Prudencio Aguilar. Almost pulverized at that time by the decrepitude of
death, Prudencio Aguilar would come twice a day to chat with him. They talked about fighting
cocks. They promised each other to set up a breeding farm for magnificent birds, not so much to
enjoy their victories, which they would not need then, as to have something to do on the tedious
Sundays of death. It was Prudencio Aguilar who cleaned him fed him and brought him splendid
news of an unknown person called Aureliano who was a colonel in the war. When he was alone,
José Arcadio Buendía consoled himself with the dream of the infinite rooms. He dreamed that he
was getting out of bed, opening the door and going into an identical room with the same bed with a
wrought-iron head, the same wicker chair, and the same small picture of the Virgin of Help on the
back wall. From that room he would go into another that was just the same, the door of which
would open into another that was just the same, the door of which would open into another one just
the same, and then into another exactly alike, and so on to infinity. He liked to go from room to
room. As in a gallery of parallel mirrors, until Prudencio Aguilar would touch him on the shoulder.
Then he would go back from room to room, walking in reverse, going back over his trail, and he
would find Prudencio Aguilar in the room of reality. But one night, two weeks after they took him
to his bed, Prudencio Aguilar touched his shoulder in an intermediate room and he stayed there
forever, thinking that it was the real room. On the following morning Úrsula was bringing him his
breakfast when she saw a man coming along the hall. He was short and stocky, with a black suit on
and a hat that was also black, enormous, pulled down to his taciturn eyes. “Good Lord,” Úrsula
thought, “I could have sworn it was Melquíades.” It was Cataure, Visitación’s brother, who had left
the house fleeing from the insomnia plague and of whom there had never been any news. Visitación
asked him why he had come back, and he answered her in their solemn language:

“I have come for the exequies of the king.”

Then they went into José Arcadio Buendía’s room, shook him as hard as they could, shouted in
his ear, put a mirror in front of his nostrils, but they could not awaken him. A short time later, when
the carpenter was taking measurements for the coffin, through the window they saw a light rain of
tiny yellow flowers falling. They fell on the town all through the night in a silent storm, and they
covered the roofs and blocked the doors and smothered the animals who dept outdoors. So many


flowers fell from the sky that in the morning the streets were carpeted with a compact cushion and
they had to clear them away with shovels and rakes so that the funeral procession could pass by.


Chapter 8

SITTNG IN THE WICKER ROCKING chair with her interrupted work in her lap, Amaranta watched
Aureliano, José , his chin covered with foam, stropping his razor to give himself his first shave. His
blackheads bled and he cut his upper lip as he tried to shape a mustache of blond fuzz and when it
was all over he looked the same as before, but the laborious process gave Amaranta the feeling that
she had begun to grow old at that moment.

“You look just like Aureliano when he was your age,” she said. “You’re a man now.”

He had been for a long time, ever since that distant day when Amaranta thought he was still a
child and continued getting undressed in front of him in the bathroom as she had always done, as
she had been used to doing ever since Pilar Ternera had turned him over to her to finish his
upbringing. The first time that he saw her the only thing that drew his attention was the deep
depression between her breasts. He was so innocent that he asked her what had happened to her
and Amaranta pretended to dig into her breasts with the tips of her fingers and answered: “They
gave me some terrible cuts.” Some time later, when she had recovered from Pietro Crespi’s suicide
and would bathe with Aureliano José again, he no longer paid attention to the depression but felt a
strange trembling at the sight of the splendid breasts with their brown nipples. He kept on
examining her, discovering the miracle of her intimacy inch by inch, and he felt his skin tingle as he
contemplated the way her skin tingled when it touched the water. Ever since he was a small child he
had the custom of leaving his hammock and waking up in Amaranta’s bed, because contact with her
was a way of overcoming his fear of the dark. But since that day when he became aware of his own
nakedness, it was not fear of the dark that drove him to crawl in under her mosquito netting but an
urge to feel Amaranta’s warm breathing at dawn. Early one morning during the time when she
refused Colonel Gerineldo Márquez, Aureliano José awoke with the feeling that he could not
breathe. He felt Amaranta’s fingers searching across his stomach like warm and anxious little
caterpillars. Pretending to sleep, he changed his position to make it easier, and then he felt the hand
without the black bandage diving like a blind shellfish into the algae of his anxiety. Although they
seemed to ignore what both of them knew and what each one knew that the other knew, from that
night on they were yoked together in an inviolable complicity. Aureliano José could not get to sleep
until he heard the twelve-o’clock waltz on the parlor dock, and the mature maiden whose skin was
beginning to grow sad did not have a moments’ rest until she felt slip in under her mosquito netting
that sleepwalker whom she had raised, not thinking that he would be a palliative for her solitude.
Later they not only slept together, naked, exchanging exhausting caresses, but they would also chase
each other into the corners of the house and shut themselves up in the bedrooms at any hour of the
day in a permanent state of unrelieved excitement. They were almost discovered by Úrsula one
afternoon when she went into the granary as they were starting to kiss. “Do you love your aunt a
lot?” she asked Aureliano José in an innocent way. He answered that he did. “That’s good of you,”
Úrsula concluded and finished measuring the flour for the bread and returned to the kitchen. That
episode drew Amaranta out of her delirium. She realized that she had gone too far, that she was no
longer playing kissing games with a child, but was floundering about in an autumnal passion, one
that was dangerous and had no future, and she cut it off with one stroke. Aureliano José, who was
then finishing his military training, finally woke up to reality and went to sleep in the barracks. On
Saturdays he would go with the soldiers to Catarino’s store. He was seeking consolation for his
abrupt solitude, for his premature adolescence with women who smelled of dead flowers, whom he
idealized in the darkness and changed into Amaranta by means of the anxious efforts of his
imagination.


A short time later contradictory news of the war began to come in. While the government itself
admitted the progress of the rebellion, the officers in Macondo had confidential reports of the
imminence of a negotiated peace. Toward the first of April a special emissary identified himself to
Colonel Gerineldo Márquez. He confirmed the fact to him that the leaders of the party had indeed
established contact with the rebel leaders in the interior and were on the verge of arranging an
armistice in exchange for three cabinet posts for the Liberals, a minority representation in the
congress, and a general amnesty for rebels who laid down their arms. The emissary brought a highly
confidential order from Colonel Aureliano Buendía, who was not in agreement with the terms of the
armistice. Colonel Gerineldo Márquez was to choose five of his best men and prepare to leave the
country with them. The order would be carried out with the strictest secrecy. One week before the
agreement was announced, and in the midst of a storm of contradictory rumors, Colonel Aureliano
Buendía and ten trusted officers, among them Colonel Roque Carnicero, stealthily arrived in
Macondo after midnight, dismissed the garrison, buried their weapons, and destroyed their records.
By dawn they had left town, along with Colonel Gerineldo Márquez and his five officers. It was such
a quick and secret operation that Úrsula did not find out about it until the last moment, when
someone tapped on her bedroom window and whispered, “If you want to see Colonel Aureliano
Buendía, come to the door right now.” Úrsula Jumped out of bed and went to the door in her night-
gown and she was just able to see the horsemen who were leaving town gallop off in a mute cloud
of dust. Only on the following day did she discover that Aureliano José had gone with his father.

Ten days after a joint communiqué by the government and the opposition announced the end of
the war, there was news of the first armed uprising of Colonel Aureliano Buendía on the western
border. His small and poorly armed force was scattered in less than a week. But during that year,
while Liberals and Conservatives tried to make the country believe in reconciliation, he attempted
seven other revolts. One night he bombarded Riohacha from a schooner and the garrison dragged
out of bed and shot the fourteen best-known Liberals in the town as a reprisal. For more than two
weeks he held a customs post on the border and from there sent the nation a call to general war.
Another of his expectations was lost for three months in the jungle in a mad attempt to cross more
than a thousand miles of virgin territory in order to proclaim war on the outskirts of the capital. On
one occasion he was lea than fifteen miles away from Macondo and was obliged by government
patrols to hide in the mountains, very close to the enchanted region where his father had found the
fossil of a Spanish galleon many years before.

Visitación died around that time. She had the pleasure of dying a natural death after having
renounced a throne out of fear of insomnia, and her last wish was that they should dig up the wages
she had saved for more than twenty years under her bed and send the money to Colonel Aureliano
Buendía so that he could go on with the war. But Úrsula did not bother to dig it up because it was
rumored in those days that Colonel Aureliano Buendía had been killed in a landing near the
provincial capital. The official announcement—the fourth in less than two years—was considered
true for almost six months because nothing further was heard of him. Suddenly, when Úrsula and
Amaranta had added new mourning to the past period, unexpected news arrived. Colonel Aureliano
Buendía was alive, but apparently he had stopped harassing the government of his country and had
joined with the victorious federalism of other republics of the Caribbean. He would show up under
different names farther and farther away from his own country. Later it would be learned that the
idea that was working on him at the time was the unification of the federalist forms of Central
America in order to wipe out conservative regimes from Alaska to Patagonia. The first direct news
that Úrsula received from him, several years after his departure, was a wrinkled and faded letter that
had arrived, passing through various hands, from Santiago, Cuba.

“We’ve lost him forever,” Úrsula exclaimed on reading it. “If he follows this path he’ll spend
Christmas at the ends of the earth.”


The person to whom she said it, who was the first to whom she showed the letter, was the
Conservative general José Raquel Moncada, mayor of Macondo since the end of the war. “This
Aureliano,” General Moncada commented, “what a pity that he’s not a Conservative.” He really
admired him. Like many Conservative civilians, José Raquel Moncada had waged war in defense of
his party and had earned the title of general on the field of battle, even though he was not a military
man by profession. On the contrary, like so many of his fellow party members, he was an
antimilitarist. He considered military men unprincipled loafers, ambitious plotters, experts in facing
down civilians in order to prosper during times of disorder. Intelligent, pleasant, ruddy-faced, a man
who liked to eat and watch cockfights, he had been at one time the most feared adversary of Colonel
Aureliano Buendía. He succeeded in imposing his authority over the career officers in a wide sector
along the coast. One time when he was forced by strategic circumstances to abandon a stronghold
to the forces of Colonel Aureliano Buendía, he left two letters for him. In one of them quite long, he
invited him to join in a campaign to make war more humane. The other letter was for his wife, who
lived in Liberal territory, and he left it with a plea to see that it reached its destination. From then on,
even in the bloodiest periods of the war, the two commanders would arrange truces to exchange
prisoners. They were pauses with a certain festive atmosphere, which General Moncada took
advantage of to teach Colonel Aureliano Buendía how to play chess. They became great friends.
They even came to think about the possibility of coordinating the popular elements of both parties,
doing away with the influence of the military men and professional politicians, and setting up a
humanitarian regime that would take the best from each doctrine. When the war was over, while
Colonel Aureliano, Buendía was sneaking about through the narrow trails of permanent sub.
version, General Moncada was named magistrate of Macondo. He wore civilian clothes, replaced the
soldiers with unarmed policemen, enforced the amnesty laws, and helped a few families of Liberals
who had been killed in the war. He succeeded in having Macondo raised to the status of a
municipality and he was therefore its first mayor, and he created an atmosphere of confidence that
made people think of the war as an absurd nightmare of the past. Father Nicanor, consumed by
hepatic fever, was replaced by Father Coronel, whom they called “The Pup,” a veteran of the first
federalist war. Bruno Crespi, who was married to Amparo Mos. cote, and whose shop of toys and
musical instruments continued to prosper, built a theater which Spanish companies included in their
Itineraries. It was a vast open-air hall with wooden benches, a velvet curtain with Greek masks, and
three box offices in the shape of lions’ heads, through whose mouths the tickets were sold. It was
also about that time that the school was rebuilt. It was put under the charge of Don Melchor
Escalona, an old teacher brought from the swamp, who made his lazy students walk on their knees
in the lime-coated courtyard and made the students who talked in class eat hot chili with the
approval of their parents. Aureliano Segundo and José Arcadio Segundo, the willful twins of Santa
Sofía de la Piedad, were the first to sit in the classroom, with their slates, their chalk, and their
aluminum jugs with their names on them. Remedios, who inherited her mother’s pure beauty, began
to be known as Remedios the Beauty. In spite of time, of the superimposed Periods of mourning,
and her accumulated afflictions, Úrsula resisted growing old. Aided by Santa Sofía de la Piedad, she
gave a new drive to her pastry business and in a few years not only recovered the fortune that her
son had spent in the war, but she once more stuffed with pure gold the gourds buried in the
bedroom. “As long as God gives me life,” she would say, “there will always be money in this
madhouse.” That was how things were when Aureliano José deserted the federal troops in
Nicaragua, signed on as a crewman on a German ship, and appeared in the kitchen of the house,
sturdy as a horse, as dark and long-haired as an Indian, and with a secret determination to marry
Amaranta.

When Amaranta, saw him come in, even though he said nothing she knew immediately why he
had come back. At the table they did not dare look each other in the face. But two weeks after his


return, in the presence of Úrsula, he set his eyes on hers and said to her, “I always thought a lot
about you.” Amaranta avoided him. She guarded against chance meetings. She tried not to become
separated from Remedios the Beauty. She was ashamed of the blush that covered her cheeks on the
day her nephew asked her how long she intended wearing the black bandage on her hand, for she
interpreted it as an allusion to her virginity. When he arrived, she barred the door of her bedroom,
but she heard his peaceful snoring in the next room for so many nights that she forgot about the
precaution. Early one morning, almost two months after his return, she heard him come into the
bedroom. Then, instead of fleeing, instead of shouting as she had thought she would, she let herself
be saturated with a soft feeling of relaxation. She felt him slip in under the mosquito netting as he
had done when he was a child, as he had always done, and she could not repress her cold sweat and
the chattering of her teeth when she realized that he was completely naked. “Go away,” she
whispered, suffocating with curiosity. “Go away or I’ll scream.” But Aureliano José knew then what
he had to do, because he was no longer a child but a barracks animal. Starting with that night the
dull, inconsequential battles began again and would go on until dawn. “I’m your aunt,” Amaranta
murmured, spent. “It’s almost as if I were your mother, not just because of my age but because the
only thing I didn’t do for you was nurse you.” Aureliano would escape at dawn and come back early
in the morning on the next day, each time more excited by the proof that she had not barred the
door. He had nit stopped desiring her for a single instant. He found her in the dark bedrooms of
captured towns, especially in the most abject ones, and he would make her materialize in the smell
of dry blood on the bandages of the wounded, in the instantaneous terror of the danger of death, at
all times and in all places. He had fled from her in an attempt to wipe out her memory, not only
through distance but by means of a muddled fury that his companions at arms took to be boldness,
but the more her image wallowed in the dunghill of the war, the more the war resembled Amaranta.
That was how he suffered in exile, looking for a way of killing her with, his own death, until he
heard some old man tell the tale of the man who had married his aunt, who was also his cousin, and
whose son ended up being his own grandfather.

“Can a person marry his own aunt?” he asked, startled.

“He not only can do that, a soldier answered him. “but we’re fighting this war against the priests
so that a person can marry his own mother.”

Two weeks later he deserted. He found Amaranta more withered than in his memory, more
melancholy and shy, and now really turning the last corner of maturity, but more feverish than ever
in the darkness of her bedroom and more challenging than ever in the aggressiveness of her
resistance. “You’re a brute,” Amaranta would tell him as she was harried by his hounds. “You can’t
do that to a poor aunt unless you have a special dispensation from the Pope.” Aureliano, José
promised to go to Rome, he promised to go across Europe on his knees to kiss the sandals of the
Pontiff just so that she would lower her drawbridge.

“It’s not just that,” Amaranta retorted. “Any children will be born with the tail of a pig.”

Aureliano José was deaf to all arguments.

“I don’t care if they’re born as armadillos,” he begged.

Early one morning, vanquished by the unbearable pain of repressed virility, he went to Catarino’s.
He found a woman with flaccid breasts, affectionate and cheap, who calmed his stomach for some
time. He tried to apply the treatment of disdain to Amaranta. He would see her on the porch
working at the sewing machine, which she had learned to operate with admirable skill, and he would
not even speak to her. Amaranta felt freed of a reef, and she herself did not understand why she
started thinking again at that time about Colonel Gerineldo Márquez, why she remembered with
such nostalgia the afternoons of Chinese checkers, and why she even desired him as the man in her
bedroom. Aureliano, José did not realize how much ground he had lost on, the night he could no


longer bear the farce of indifference and went back to Amaranta’s room. She rejected him with an
inflexible and unmistakable determination, and she barred the door of her bedroom forever.

A few months after the return of Aureliano José an exuberant woman perfumed with jasmine
appeared at the house with a boy of five. She stated that he was the son of Colonel Aureliano
Buendía and that she had brought him to Úrsula to be baptized. No one doubted the origins of that
nameless child: he looked exactly like the colonel at the time he was taken to see ice for the first
time. The woman said that he had been born with his eyes open, looking at people with the
judgment of an adult, and that she was frightened by his way of staring at things without blinking.
“He’s identical,” Úrsula said. “The only thing missing is for him to make chairs rock by simply
looking at them.” They christened him Aureliano and with his mother’s last name, since the law did
not permit a person to bear his father’s name until he had recognized him. General Moncada was
the godfather. Although Amaranta insisted that he be left so that she could take over his upbringing,
his mother was against it. Úrsula at that time did not know about the custom of sending virgins to
the bedrooms of soldiers in the same way that hens are turned loose with fine roosters, but in the
course of that year she found out: nine more sons of Colonel Aureliano Buendía were brought to
the house to be baptized. The oldest, a strange dark boy with green eyes, who was not at all like his
father’s family, was over ten years old. They brought children of all ages, all colors, but all males and
all with a look of solitude that left no doubt as to the relationship. Only two stood out in the group.
One, large for his age, made smithereens out of the flowerpots and china because his hands seemed
to have the property of breaking everything they touched. The other was a blond boy with the same
light eyes as his mother, whose hair had been left to grow long and curly like that of a woman. He
entered the house with a great deal of familiarity, as if he had been raised there, and he went directly
to a chest in Úrsula’s bedroom and demanded, “I want the mechanical ballerina.” Úrsula was
startled. She opened the chest, searched among the ancient and dusty articles left from the days of
Melquíades, and wrapped in a pair of stockings she found the mechanical ballerina that Pietro Crespi
had brought to the house once and that everyone had forgotten about. In less than twelve years they
baptized with the name Aureliano and the last name of the mother all the sons that the colonel had
implanted up and down his theater of war: seventeen. At first Úrsula would fill their pockets with
money and Amaranta tried to have them stay. But they finally limited themselves to giving them
presents and serving as godmothers. “We’ve done our duty by baptizing them,” Úrsula would say,
jotting down in a ledger the name and address of the mother and the place and date of birth of the
child. “Aureliano needs well-kept accounts so that he can decide things when he comes back.”
During lunch, commenting with General Moncada about that disconcerting proliferation, she
expressed the desire for Colonel Aureliano Buendía to come back someday and gather all of his sons
together in the house.

“Don’t worry, dear friend,” General Moncada said enigmatically. “He’ll come sooner than you
suspect.”

What General Moncada knew and what he did not wish to reveal at lunch was that Colonel
Aureliano Buendía was already on his way to head up the most prolonged, radical, and bloody
rebellion of all those he had started up till then.

The situation again became as tense as it had been during the months that preceded the first war.
The cockfights, instituted by the mayor himself, were suspended. Captain Aquiles Ricardo, the
commander of the garrison, took over the exercise of municipal power. The Liberals looked upon
him as a provocateur. “Something terrible is going to happen,” Úrsula would say to Aureliano José.
“Don’t go out into the street after six o’clock.” The entreaties were useless. Aureliano José, just like
Arcadio in other times, had ceased to belong to her. It was as if his return home, the possibility of
existing without concerning himself with everyday necessities, had awakened in him the lewd and
lazy leanings of his uncle José Arcadio. His passion for Amaranta had been extinguished without


leaving any scars. He would drift around, playing pool, easing his solitude with occasional women,
sacking the hiding places where Úrsula had forgotten her money. He ended up coming home only to
change his clothes. “They’re all alike,” Úrsula lamented. “At first they behave very well, they’re
obedient and prompt and they don’t seem capable of killing a fly, but as soon as their beards appear
they go to ruin.” Unlike Arcadio, who had never known his real origins, he found out that he was
the son of Pilar Ternera, who had hung up a hammock so that he could take his siesta in her house.
More than mother and son, they were accomplices in solitude. Pilar Ternera had lost the trail of all
hope. Her laugh had taken on the tones of an organ, her breasts had succumbed to the tedium of
endless caressing, her stomach and her thighs had been the victims of her irrevocable fate as a
shared woman, but her heart grew old without bitterness. Fat, talkative, with the airs of a matron in
disgrace, she renounced the sterile illusions of her cards and found peace and consolation in other
people’s loves. In the house where Aureliano José took his siesta, the girls from the neighborhood
would receive their casual lovers. “Lend me your room, Pilar,” they would simply say when they
were already inside. “Of course,” Pilar would answer. And if anyone was present she would explain:

“I’m happy knowing that people are happy in bed.”

She never charged for the service. She never refused the favor, just as she never refused the
countless men who sought her out, even in the twilight of her maturity, without giving her money or
love and only occasionally pleasure. Her five daughters, who inherited a burning seed, had been lost
on the byways of life since adolescence. Of the two sons she managed to raise, one died fighting in
the forces of Colonel Aureliano Buendía and the other was wounded and captured at the age of
fourteen when he tried to steal a crate of chickens in a town in the swamp. In a certain way,
Aureliano José was the tall, dark man who had been promised her for half a century by the king of
hearts, and like all men sent by the cards he reached her heart when he was already stamped with the
mark of death. She saw it in the cards.

“Don’t go out tonight,” she told him. “Stay and sleep here because Carmelita Montiel is getting
tired of asking me to put her in your room.”

Aureliano José did not catch the deep feeling of begging that was in the offer.

“Tell her to wait for me at midnight” he said. He went to the theater, where a Spanish company
was putting on The Dagger of the Fox, which was really Zorzilla’s play with the title changed by order
of Captain Aquiles Ricardo, because the Liberals called the Conservatives Goths. Only when he
handed in his ticket at the door did Aureliano José realize that Captain Aquiles Ricardo and two
soldiers armed with rifles were searching the audience.

“Be careful, captain,” Aureliano José warned him. “The man hasn’t been born yet who can lay
hands on me.” The captain tried to search him forcibly and Aureliano José, who was unarmed,
began to run. The soldiers disobeyed the order to shoot. “He’s a Buendía,” one of them explained.
Blind with rage, the captain then snatched away the rifle, stepped into the center of the street, and
took aim.”

“Cowards!” he shouted. “I only wish it was Colonel Aureliano Buendía.”

Carmelita Montiel, a twenty-year-old virgin, had just bathed in orange-blossom water and was
strewing rosemary leaves on Pilar Ternera’s bed when the shot rang out. Aureliano José had been
destined to find with her the happiness that Amaranta had denied him, to have seven children, and
to die in her arms of old age, but the bullet that entered his back and shattered his chest had been
directed by a wrong interpretation of the cards. Captain Aquiles Ricardo, who was really the one
destined to die that night, did indeed die, four hours before Aureliano José. As won as the shot was
heard he was brought down by two simultaneous bullets whose origin was never established and a
shout of many voices shook the night.

“Long live the Liberal party! Long live Colonel Aureliano Buendía!”


At twelve o’clock, when Aureliano, José had bled to death and Carmelita Montiel found that the
cards showing her future were blank, more than four hundred men had filed past the theater and
discharged their revolvers into the abandoned body of Captain Aquiles Ricardo. A patrol had to use
a wheelbarrow to carry the body, which was heavy with lead and fell apart like a water-soaked loaf of
bread.

Annoyed by the outrages of the regular army, General José Raquel Moncada used his political
influence, put on his uniform again, and assumed the civil and military leadership of Macondo. He
did not expect, however, that his conciliatory attitude would be able to prevent the inevitable. The
news in September was contradictory. While the government announced that it was maintaining
control throughout the country, the Liberals were receiving secret news of armed uprisings in the
interior. The regime would not admit a state of war until it was proclaimed in a decree that had
followed a court-martial which had condemned Colonel Aureliano Buendía to death in absentia. The
first unit that captured him was ordered to carry the sentence out. “This means he’s come back,”
Úrsula said joyfully to General Moncada. But he himself knew nothing about it.

Actually, Colonel Aureliano Buendía had been in the country for more than a month. He was
preceded by conflicting rumors, supposed to be in the most distant places at the same time, and
even General Moncada did not believe in his return until it was officially announced that he had
seized two states on the coast. “Congratulations, dear friend,” he told Úrsula, showing her the
telegram. “You’ll soon have him here.” Úrsula was worried then for the first time. “And what will
you do?” she asked. General Moncada had asked himself that same question many times.

“The same as he, my friend,” he answered. “I’ll do my duty.”

At dawn on the first of October Colonel Aureliano Buendía attacked Macondo with a thousand
well-armed men and the garrison received orders to resist to the end. At noon, while General
Moncada was lunching with Úrsula, a rebel cannon shot that echoed in the whole town blew the
front of the municipal treasury to dust. “They’re as well armed as we are,” General Moncada sighed,
“but besides that they’re fighting because they want to.” At two o’clock in the afternoon, while the
earth trembled with the artillery fire from both sides, he took leave of Úrsula with the certainty that
he was fighting a losing battle.

“I pray to God that you won’t have Aureliano in the house tonight,” he said. “If it does happen
that way, give him an embrace for me, because I don’t expect ever to see him again.”

That night he was captured when he tried to escape from Macondo, after writing a long letter to
Colonel Aureliano Buendía in which he reminded him of their common aim to humanize the war
and he wished him a final victory over the corruption of the militarists and the ambitions of the
politicians in both parties. On the following day Colonel Aureliano Buendía had lunch with him in
Úrsula’s house, where he was being held until a revolutionary court-martial decided his fate. It was a
friendly gathering. But while the adversaries forgot the war to remember things of the past, Úrsula
had the gloomy feeling that her son was an intruder. She had felt it ever since she saw him come in
protected by a noisy military retinue, which turned the bedrooms inside out until they were
convinced there was no danger. Colonel Aureliano Buendía not only accepted it but he gave strict
orders that no one should come closer than ten feet, not even Úrsula, while the members of his
escort finished placing guards about the house. He was wearing an ordinary denim uniform with no
insignia of any kind and high boots with spurs that were caked with mud and dried blood. On his
waist he wore a holster with the flap open and his hand, which was always on the butt of the pistol,
revealed the same watchful and resolute tension as his look. His head, with deep recessions in the
hairline now, seemed to have been baked in a slow oven. His face, tanned by the salt of the
Caribbean, had acquired a metallic hardness. He was preserved against imminent old age by a vitality
that had something to do with the coldness of his insides. He was taller than when he had left, paler
and bonier, and he showed the first symptoms of resistance to nostalgia. “Good Lord,” Úrsula said


to herself. “Now he looks like a man capable of anything.” He was. The Aztec shawl that he brought
Amaranta, the remembrances he spoke of at lunch, the funny stories her told were simple leftovers
from his humor of a different time. As soon as the order to bury the dead in a common grave was
carried out, he assigned Colonel Roque Carnicero the minion of setting up courts-martial and he
went ahead with the exhausting task of imposing radical reforms which would not leave a stone of
the reestablished Conservative regime in place. “We have to get ahead of the politicians in the
party,” he said to his aides. “When they open their eyes to reality they’ll find accomplished facts.” It
was then that he decided to review the titles to land that went back a hundred years and he
discovered the legalized outrages of his brother, José Arcadio. He annulled the registrations with a
stroke of the pen. As a last gesture of courtesy, he left his affairs for an hour and visited Rebeca to
bring her up to date on what he was determined to do.

In the shadows of her house, the solitary widow who at one time had been the confidante of his
repressed loves and whose persistence had saved his life was a specter out of the past. Encased in
black down to her knuckles, with her heart turned to ash, she scarcely knew anything about the war.
Colonel Aureliano Buendía had the impression that the phosphorescence of her bones was showing
through her skin and that she moved in an atmosphere of Saint Elmo’s fire, in a stagnant air where
one could still note a hidden smell of gunpowder. He began by advising her to moderate the rigor of
her mourning, to ventilate the house, to forgive the world for the death of José Arcadio. But Rebeca
was already beyond any vanity. After searching for it uselessly in the taste of earth, in, the perfumed
letters from Pietro Crespi, in the tempestuous bed of her husband, she had found peace in that
house where memories materialized through the strength of implacable evocation and walked like
human beings through the cloistered rooms, Leaning back in her wicker rocking chair, looking at
Colonel Aureliano Buendía as if he were the one who looked like a ghost out of the past, Rebeca
was not even upset by the news that the lands usurped by José Arcadio would be returned to their
rightful owners.

“Whatever you decide will be done, Aureliano,” she sighed. “I always thought and now I have the
proof that you’re a renegade.”

The revision of the deeds took place at the same time as the summary courts-martial presided
over by Colonel Gerineldo Márquez, which ended with the execution of all officers of the regular
army who had been taken prisoner by the revolutionaries. The last court-martial was that of José
Raquel Moncada. Úrsula intervened. ‘”His government was the best we’ve ever had in Macondo,”
she told Colonel Aureliano Buendía. “I don’t have to tell you anything about his good heart, about
his affection for us, because you know better than anyone.” Colonel Aureliano Buendía gave her a
disapproving look.

“I can’t take over the job of administering justice,” he replied. “If you have something to say, tell
it to the court-martial.”

Úrsula not only did that she also brought all of the mothers of the revolutionary officers who
lived in Macondo to testify. One by one the old women who had been founders of the town, several
of whom had taken part in the daring crossing of the mountains, praised the virtues of General
Moncada. Úrsula was the last in line. Her gloomy dignity, the weight of her name, the convincing
vehemence of her declaration made the scale of justice hesitate for a moment. “You have taken this
horrible game very seriously and you have done well because you are doing your duty,” she told the
members of the court. “But don’t forget that as long as God gives us life we will still be mothers and
no matter how revolutionary you may be, we have the right to pull down your pants and give you a
whipping at the first sign of disrespect.” The court retired to deliberate as those words still echoed in
the school that had been turned into a barracks. At midnight General José Raquel Moncada was
sentenced to death. Colonel Aureliano Buendía, in spite of the violent recriminations of Úrsula,


refused to commute the sentence. A short while before dawn he visited the condemned man in the
room used as a cell.

“Remember, old friend,” he told him. “I’m not shooting you. It’s the revolution that’s shooting
you.”

General Moncada did not even get up from the cot when he saw him come in.

“Go to hell, friend,” he answered.

Until that moment, ever since his return. Colonel Aureliano Buendía had not given himself the
opportunity to see him with his heart. He was startled to see how much he had aged, how his hands
shook, and the rather punctilious conformity with which he awaited death, and then he felt a great
disgust with himself, which he mingled with the beginnings of pity.

“You know better than I,” he said, “that all courts-martial are farces and that you’re really paying
for the crimes of other people, because this time we’re going to win the war at any price. Wouldn’t
you have done the same in my place?”

General Moncada, got up to clean his thick horn-rimmed glasses on his shirttail. “Probably,” he
said. “But what worries me is not your shooting me, because after all, for people like us it’s a natural
death.” He laid his glasses on the bed and took off his watch and chain. “What worries me,” he went
on, “is that out of so much hatred for the military, out of fighting them so much and thinking about
them so much, you’ve ended up as bad as they are. And no ideal in life is worth that much
baseness.” He took off his wedding ring and the medal of the Virgin of Help and put them
alongside his glasses and watch.

“At this rate,” he concluded, “you’ll not only be the most despotic and bloody dictator in our
history, but you’ll shoot my dear friend Úrsula in an attempt to pacify your conscience.”

Colonel Aureliano Buendía stood there impassively. General Moncada then gave him the glasses,
medal, watch, and ring and he changed his tone.

“But I didn’t send for you to scold you,” he said. “I wanted to ask you the favor of sending these
things to my wife.”

Colonel Aureliano Buendía put them in his pockets.

“Is she still in Manaure?”

“She’s still in Manaure,” General Moncada confirmed, “in the same house behind the church
where you sent the letter.”

“I’ll be glad to, José Raquel,” Colonel Aureliano Buendía said.

When he went out into the blue air of the mist his face grew damp as on some other dawn in the
past and only then did he realize that -he had ordered the sentence to be carried out in the courtyard
and not at the cemetery wall. The firing squad, drawn up opposite the door, paid him the honors of
a head of state.

“They can bring him out now,” he ordered.


Chapter 9

COLONEL GERINELDO MÁRQUEZ was the first to perceive the emptiness of the war. In his position
as civil and military leader of Macondo he would have telegraphic conversations twice a week with
Colonel Aureliano Buendía. At first those exchanges would determine the course of a flesh-and-
blood war, the perfectly defined outlines of which told them at any moment the exact spot -where it
was and the prediction of its future direction. Although he never let himself be pulled into the area
of confidences, not even by his closest friends, Colonel Aureliano Buendía still had at that time the
familiar tone that made it possible to identify him at the other end of the wire. Many times he would
prolong the talk beyond the expected limit and let them drift into comments of a domestic nature.
Little by little, however, and as the war became more intense and widespread, his image was fading
away into a universe of unreality. The characteristics of his speech were more and more uncertain,
and they cam together and combined to form words that were gradually losing all meaning. Colonel
Gerineldo Márquez limited himself then to just listening, burdened by the impression that he was in
telegraphic contact with a stranger from another world.

“I understand, Aureliano,” he would conclude on the key. “Long live the Liberal party!”

He finally lost all contact with the war. What in other times had been a real activity, an irresistible
passion of his youth, became a remote point of reference for him: an emptiness. His only refuge was
Amaranta’s sewing room. He would visit her every afternoon. He liked to watch her hands as she
curled frothy petticoat cloth in the machine that was kept in motion by Remedios the Beauty. They
spent many hours without speaking, content with their reciprocal company, but while Amaranta was
inwardly pleased in keeping the fire of his devotion alive, he was unaware of the secret designs of
that indecipherable heart. When the news of his return reached her, Amaranta had been smothered
by anxiety. But when she saw him enter the house in the middle of Colonel Aureliano Buendía’s
noisy escort and she saw how he had been mistreated by the rigors of exile, made old by age and
oblivion, dirty with sweat and dust, smelling like a herd, ugly, with his left arm in a sling, she felt
faint with disillusionment. “My God,” she thought. “This wasn’t the person I was waiting for.” On
the following day, however, he came back to the house shaved and clean, with his mustache
perfumed with lavender water and without the bloody sling. He brought her a prayerbook bound in
mother-of-pearl.

“How strange men are,” she said, because she could not think of anything else to say. “They
spend their lives fighting against priests and then give prayerbooks as gifts.”

From that time on, even during the most critical days of the war, he visited her every afternoon.
Many times, when Remedios the Beauty was not present, it was he who turned the wheel on the
sewing machine. Amaranta felt upset by the perseverance, the loyalty, the submissiveness of that
man who was invested with so much authority and who nevertheless took off his sidearm in the
living room so that he could go into the sewing room without weapons, But for four years he kept
repeating his love and she would always find a way to reject him without hurting him, for even
though she had not succeeded in loving him she could no longer live without him. Remedios the
Beauty, who seemed indifferent to everything and who was thought to be mentally retarded, was not
insensitive to so much devotion and she intervened in Colonel Gerineldo Márquez’s favor.
Amaranta suddenly discovered that the girl she had raised, who was just entering adolescence, was
already the most beautiful creature that had even been seen in Macondo. She felt reborn in her heart
the rancor that she had felt in other days for Rebeca, and begging God not to impel her into the
extreme state of wishing her dead, she banished her from the sewing room. It was around that time
that Colonel Gerineldo Márquez began to feel the boredom of the war. He summoned his reserves


of persuasion, his broad and repressed tenderness, ready to give up for Amaranta a glory that had
cost him the sacrifice of his best years. But he could not succeed in convincing her. One August
afternoon, overcome by the unbearable weight of her own obstinacy, Amaranta locked herself in her
bedroom to weep over her solitude unto death after giving her final answer to her tenacious suitor:

“Let’s forget about each other forever,” she told him. “We’re too old for this sort of thing now.”

Colonel Gerineldo Márquez had a telegraphic call from Colonel Aureliano Buendía that
afternoon. It was a routine conversation which was not going to bring about any break in the
stagnant war. At the end, Colonel Gerineldo Márquez looked at the desolate streets, the crystal water
on the almond trees, and he found himself lost in solitude.

“Aureliano,” he said sadly on the key, “it’s raining in Macondo.”

There was a long silence on the line. Suddenly the apparatus jumped with the pitiless letters from
Colonel Aureliano Buendía.

“Don’t be a jackass, Gerineldo,” the signals said. “It’s natural for it to be raining in August.”

They had not seen each other for such a long time that Colonel Gerineldo Márquez was upset by
the aggressiveness of the reaction. Two months later, however, when Colonel Aureliano Buendía
returned to Macondo, his upset was changed to stupefaction. Even Úrsula was surprised at how
much he had changed. He came with no noise, no escort, wrapped in a cloak in spite of the heat,
and with three mistresses, whom he installed in the same house, where he spent most of his time
lying in a hammock. He scarcely read the telegraphic dispatches that reported routine operations.
On one occasion Colonel Gerineldo Márquez asked him for instructions for the evacuation of a
spot on the border where there was a danger that the conflict would become an international affair.

“Don’t bother me with trifles,” he ordered him. “Consult Divine Providence.”

It was perhaps the most critical moment of the war. The Liberal landowners, who had supported
the revolution in the beginning, had made secret alliances with the Conservative landowners in order
to stop the revision of property titles. The politicians who supplied funds for the war from exile had
Publicly repudiated the drastic aims of Colonel Aureliano Buendía, but even that withdrawal of
authorization did not seem to bother him. He had not returned to reading his poetry, which filled
more than five volumes and lay forgotten at the bottom of his trunk. At night or at siesta time he
would call one of his women to his hammock and obtain a rudimentary satisfaction from her, and
then he would sleep like a stone that was not concerned by the slightest indication of worry. Only he
knew at that time that his confused heart was condemned to uncertainty forever. At first, intoxicated
by the glory of his return, by his remarkable victories, he had peeped into the abyss of greatness. He
took pleasure in keeping by his right hand the Duke of Marlborough, his great teacher in the art of
war, whose attire of skins and tiger claws aroused the respect of adults and the awe of children. It
was then that he decided that no human being, not even Úrsula, could come closer to him than ten
feet. In the center of the chalk circle that his aides would draw wherever he stopped, and which only
he could enter, he would decide with brief orders that had no appeal the fate of the world. The first
time that he was in Manaure after the shooting of General Moncada, he hastened to fulfill his
victim’s last wish and the widow took the glasses, the medal, the watch, and the ring, but she would
not let him in the door.

“You can’t come in, colonel,” she told him. “You may be in command of your war, but I’m in
command of my house.”

Colonel Aureliano Buendía did not show any sign of anger, but his spirit only calmed down when
his bodyguard had sacked the widow’s house and reduced it to ashes. “Watch out for your heart,
Aureliano,” Colonel Gerineldo Márquez would say to him then. “You’re rotting alive.” About that
time he called together a second assembly of the principal rebel commanders. He found all types:
idealists, ambitious people, adventurers, those with social resentments, even common criminals.
There was even a former Conservative functionary who had taken refuge in the revolt to escape a


judgment for misappropriation of funds. Many of them did not even know why they were fighting
in the midst of that motley crowd, whose differences of values were on the verge of causing an
internal explosion, one gloomy authority stood out: General Te6filo Vargas. He was a full-blooded
Indian, untamed, illiterate, and endowed with quiet wiles and a messianic vocation that aroused a
demented fanaticism in his men. Colonel Aureliano Buendía called the meeting with the aim of
unifying the rebel command against the maneuvers of the politicians. General Teófilo Vargas came
forward with his intentions: in a few hours he shattered the coalition of better-qualified commanders
and took charge of the main command. “He’s a wild beast worth watching,” Colonel Aureliano
Buendía told his officers. “That man is more dangerous to us than the Minister of War.” Then a
very young captain who had always been outstanding for his timidity raised a cautious index finger.

“It’s quite simple, colonel,” he proposed. “He has to be killed.”

Colonel Aureliano Buendía was not alarmed by the coldness of the proposition but by the way in
which, by a fraction of a second, it had anticipated his own thoughts.

“Don’t expect me to give an order like that,” he said.

He did not give it, as a matter of fact. But two weeks later General Teófilo Vargas was cut to bits
by machetes in an ambush and Colonel Aureliano Buendía assumed the main command. The same
night that his authority was recognized by all the rebel commands, he woke up in a fright, calling for
a blanket. An inner coldness which shattered his bones and tortured him even in the heat of the sun
would not let him sleep for several months, until it became a habit. The intoxication of power began
to break apart under waves of discomfort. Searching for a cure against the chill, he had the young
officer who had proposed the murder of General Teófilo Vargas shot. His orders were being carried
out even before they were given, even before he thought of them, and they always went much
beyond what he would have dared have them do. Lost in the solitude of his immense power, he
began to lose direction. He was bothered by the people who cheered him in neighboring villages,
and he imagined that they were the same cheers they gave the enemy. Everywhere he met
adolescents who looked at him with his own eyes, who spoke to him with his own voice, who
greeted him with the same mistrust with which he greeted them, and who said they were his sons.
He felt scattered about, multiplied, and more solitary than ever. He was convinced that his own
officers were lying to him. He fought with the Duke of Marlborough. “The best friend a person
has,” he would say at that time, “is one who has just died.” He was weary of the uncertainty, of the
vicious circle of that eternal war that always found him in the same place, but always older, wearier,
even more in the position of not knowing why, or how, or even when. There was always someone
outside of the chalk circle. Someone who needed money, someone who had a son with whooping
cough, or someone who wanted to go off and sleep forever because he could not stand the shit taste
of the war in his mouth and who, nevertheless, stood at attention to inform him: “Everything
normal, colonel.” And normality was precisely the most fearful part of that infinite war: nothing ever
happened. Alone, abandoned by his premonitions, fleeing the chill that was to accompany him until
death, he sought a last refuge in Macondo in the warmth of his oldest memories. His indolence was
so serious that when they announced the arrival of a commission from his party that was authorized
to discuss the stalemate of the war, he rolled over in his hammock without completely waking up.

“Take them to the whores,” he said.

They were six lawyers in frock coats and top hats who endured the violent November sun with
stiff stoicism. Úrsula put them up in her house. They spent the greater part of the day closeted in the
bedroom in hermetic conferences and at dusk they asked for an escort and some accordion players
and took over Catarino’s store. “Leave them alone,” Colonel Aureliano Buendía ordered. “After all,
I know what they want.” At the beginning of December the long-awaited interview, which many had
foreseen as an interminable argument, was resolved in less than an hour.


In the hot parlor, beside the specter of the pianola shrouded in a white sheet, Colonel Aureliano
Buendía did not sit down that time inside the chalk circle that his aides had drawn. He sat in a chair
between his political advisers and, wrapped in his woolen blanket, he listened in silence to the brief
proposals of the emissaries. They asked first that he renounce the revision of property titles in order
to get back the support of the Liberal landowners. They asked, secondly, that he renounce the fight
against clerical influence in order to obtain the support of the Catholic masses. They asked, finally,
that he renounce the aim of equal rights for natural and illegitimate children in order to preserve the
integrity of the home.

“That means,” Colonel Aureliano Buendía said, smiling when the reading was over, “that all
we’re fighting for is power.”

“They’re tactical changes,” one of the delegates replied. “Right now the main thing is to broaden
the popular base of the war. Then we’ll have another look.”

One of Colonel Aureliano Buendía’s political advisers hastened to intervene.

“It’s a contradiction” he said. “If these changes are good, it means that the Conservative regime
is good. If we succeed in broadening the popular base of the war with them, as you people say, it
means that the regime his a broad popular base. It means, in short, that for almost twenty years
we’ve been fighting against the sentiments of the nation.”

He was going to go on, but Colonel Aureliano Buendía stopped him with a signal. “Don’t waste
your time, doctor.” he said. “The important thing is that from now on we’ll be fighting only for
power.” Still smiling, he took the documents the delegates gave him and made ready to sign them.

“Since that’s the way it is,” he concluded, “we have no objection to accepting.”

His men looked at one another in consternation. “Excuse me, colonel,” Colonel Gerineldo
Márquez said softly, “but this is a betrayal.”

Colonel Aureliano Buendía held the inked pen in the air and discharged the whole weight of his
authority on him.

“Surrender your weapons,” he ordered.

Colonel Gerineldo Márquez stood up and put his sidearms on the table.

“Report to the barracks,” Colonel Aureliano Buendía ordered him. “Put yourself at the
disposition of the revolutionary court.”

Then he signed the declaration and gave the sheets of paper to the emissaries, saying to them:

“Here an your papers, gentlemen. I hope you can get some advantage out of them.”

Two days later, Colonel Gerineldo Márquez, accused of high treason, was condemned to death.
Lying in his hammock, Colonel Aureliano Buendía was insensible to the pleas for clemency. On the
eve of the execution, disobeying the order not to bother him, Úrsula visited him in his bedroom.
Encased in black, invested with a rare solemnity, she stood during the three minutes of the
interview. “I know that you’re going to shoot Gerineldo,” she said calmly, “and that I can’t do
anything to stop it. But I give you one warning: as soon as I see his body I swear to you by the
bones of my father and mother, by the memory of José Arcadio Buendía, I swear to you before God
that I will drag you out from wherever you’re hiding and kill you with my own two hands.” Before
leaving the room, without waiting for any reply, she concluded:

“It’s the same as if you’d been born with the tail of a pig.”

During that interminable night while Colonel Gerineldo Márquez thought about his dead
afternoons in Amaranta’s sewing room, Colonel Aureliano Buendía scratched for many hours trying
to break the hard shell of his solitude. His only happy moments, since that remote afternoon when
his father had taken him to see ice, had taken place in his silver workshop where he passed the time
putting little gold fishes together. He had had to start thirty-two wars and had had to violate all of
his pacts with death and wallow like a hog in the dungheap of glory in order to discover the
privileges of simplicity almost forty years late.


At dawn, worn out by the tormented vigil, he appeared in the cell an hour before the execution.
“The farce is over, old friend,” he said to Colonel Gerineldo Márquez. “Let’s get out of here before
the mosquitoes in here execute you.” Colonel Gerineldo Márquez could not repress the disdain that
was inspired in him by that attitude.

“No, Aureliano,” he replied. “I’d rather be dead than see you changed into a bloody tyrant.”

“You won’t see me,” Colonel Aureliano Buendía said. “Put on your shoes and help me get this
shitty war over with.”

When he said it he did not know that it was easier to start a war than to end one. It took him
almost a year of fierce and bloody effort to force the government to propose conditions of peace
favorable to the rebels and another year to convince his own partisans of the convenience of
accepting them. He went to inconceivable extremes of cruelty to put down the rebellion of his own
officers, who resisted and called for victory, and he finally relied on enemy forces to make them
submit.

He was never a greater soldier than at that time. The certainty that he was finally fighting for his
own liberation and not for abstract ideals, for slogans that politicians could twist left and right
according to the circumstances, filled him with an ardent enthusiasm. Colonel Gerineldo Márquez,
who fought for defeat with as much conviction and loyalty as he had previously fought for victory,
reproached him for his useless temerity. “Don’t worry,” he would say, smiling. “Dying is much more
difficult than one imagines.” In his case it was true. The certainty that his day was assigned gave him
a mysterious immunity, an immortality or a fixed period that made him invulnerable to the risks of
war and in the end permitted him to win a defeat that was much more difficult, much more bloody
and costly than victory.

In almost twenty years of war, Colonel Aureliano Buendía had been at his house many times, but
the state of urgency with which he always arrived, the military retinue that accompanied him
everywhere, the aura of legend that glowed about his presence and of which even Úrsula was aware,
changed him into a stranger in the end. The last time that he was in Macondo and took a house for
his three concubines, he was seen in his own house only on two or three occasions when he had the
time to accept an invitation to dine. Remedios the Beauty and the twins, born during the middle of
the war, scarcely knew him. Amaranta could not reconcile her image of the brother who had spent
his adolescence making little gold fishes with that of the mythical warrior who had placed a distance
of ten feet between himself and the rest of humanity. But when the approach of the armistice
became known and they thought that he would return changed back into a human being, delivered
at last for the hearts of his own people, the family feelings, dormant for such a long time, were
reborn stronger than ever.

“We’ll finally have a man in the house again,” Úrsula said.

Amaranta was the first to suspect that they had lost him forever. One week before the armistice,
when he entered the house without an escort, preceded by two barefoot orderlies who deposited on
the porch the saddle from the mule and the trunk of poetry, all that was left of his former imperial
baggage, she saw him pass by the sewing room and she called to him. Colonel Aureliano Buendía
had trouble recognizing her.

“It’s Amaranta,” she said good-humoredly, happy at his return, and she showed him the hand
with the black bandage. “Look.”

Colonel Aureliano Buendía smiled at her the same way as when he had first seen her with the
bandage on that remote morning when he had come back to Macondo condemned to death.

“How awful,” he said, “the way time passes!”

The regular army had to protect the house. He arrived amid insults, spat upon, accused of having
accelerated the war in order to sell it for a better price. He was trembling with fever and cold and his
armpits were studded with sores again. Six months before, when she had heard talk about the


armistice, Úrsula had opened up and swept out the bridal chamber and had burned myrrh in the
corners, thinking that he would come back ready to grow old slowly among Remedios’ musty dolls.
But actually, during the last two years he had paid his final dues to life, including growing old. When
he passed by the silver shop, which Úrsula had prepared with special diligence, he did not even
notice that the keys were in the lock. He did not notice the minute, tearing destruction that time had
wreaked on the house and that, after such a prolonged absence, would have looked like a disaster to
any man who had kept his memories alive. He was not pained by the peeling of the whitewash on
the walls or the dirty, cottony cobwebs in the corners or the dust on the begonias or the veins left
on the beams by the termites or the moss on the hinges or any of the insidious traps that nostalgia
offered him. He sat down on the porch, wrapped in his blanket and with his boots still on, as if only
waiting for it to clear, and he spent the whole afternoon watching it rain on the begonias. Úrsula
understood then that they would not have him home for long. “If it’s not the war,” she thought, “it
can only be death.” It was a supposition that was so neat, so convincing that she identified it as a
premonition.

That night, at dinner, the supposed Aureliano Segundo broke his bread with his right hand and
drank his soup with his left. His twin brother, the supposed José Arcadio Segundo, broke his bread
with his left hand and drank his soup with his right. So precise was their coordination that they did
not look like two brothers sitting opposite each other but like a trick with mirrors. The spectacle that
the twins had invented when they became aware that they were equal was repeated in honor of the
new arrival. But Colonel Aureliano Buendía did not notice it. He seemed so alien to everything that
he did not even notice Remedios the Beauty as she passed by naked on her way to her bedroom.
Úrsula was the only one who dared disturb his, abstraction.

“If you have to go away again,” she said halfway through dinner, “at least try to remember how
we were tonight.”

Then Colonel Aureliano Buendía realized, without surprise, that Úrsula was the only human
being who had succeeded in penetrating his misery, and for the first time in many years he looked
her in the face. Her skin was leathery, her teeth decayed, her hair faded and colorless, and her look
frightened. He compared her with the oldest memory that he had of her, the afternoon when he had
the premonition that a pot of boiling soup was going to fall off the table, and he found her broken
to pieces. In an instant he discovered the scratches, the welts, the sores, the ulcers, and the scan that
had been left on her by more than half a century of daily life, and he saw that those damages did not
even arouse a feeling of pity in him. Then he made one last effort to search in his heart for the place
where his affection had rotted away and he could not find it. On another occasion, he felt at least a
confused sense of shame when he found the smell of Úrsula on his own skin, and more than once
he felt her thoughts interfering with his. But all of that had been wiped out by the war. Even
Remedios, his wife, at that moment was a hazy image of someone who might have been his daugh-
ter. The countless women he had known on the desert of love and who had spread his seed all along
the coast had left no trace in his feelings. Most of them had come into his room in the dark and had
left before dawn, and on the following day they were nothing but a touch of fatigue in his bodily
memory. The only affection that prevailed against time and the war was that which he had felt for
his brother José Arcadio when they both were children, and it was not based on love but on
complicity.

“I’m sorry,” he excused himself from Úrsula’s request. “It’s just that the war has done away with
everything.”

During the following days he busied himself destroying all trace of his passage through the world.
He stripped the silver shop until all that were left were impersonal objects, he gave his clothes away
to the orderlies, and he buried his weapons in the courtyard with the same feeling of penance with
which his father had buried the spear that had killed Prudencio Aguilar. He kept only one pistol with


one bullet in it. Úrsula did not intervene. The only time she dissuaded him was when he was about
to destroy the daguerreotype of Remedios that was kept in the parlor lighted by an eternal lamp.
“That picture stopped belonging to you a long time ago,” she told him. “It’s a family relic.” On the
eve of the armistice, when no single object that would let him be remembered was left in the house,
he took the trunk of poetry to the bakery when Santa Sofía de la Piedad was making ready to light
the oven.

“Light it with this,” he told her, handing her the first roll of yellowish papers. “It will, burn better
because they’re very old things.”

Santa Sofía de la Piedad, the silent one, the condescending one, the one who never contradicted
anyone, not even her own children, had the impression that it was a forbidden act.

“They’re important papers,” she said.

“Nothing of the sort,” the colonel said. “They’re things that a person writes to himself.”

“In that case,” she said, “you burn them, colonel.”

He not only did that, but he broke up the trunk with a hatchet and threw the pieces into the fire.
Hours before, Pilar Ternera had come to visit him. After so many years of not seeing her, Colonel
Aureliano Buendía was startled at how old and fat she had become and how much she had lost of
the splendor of her laugh, but he was also startled at the depths she had reached in her reading of
the cards. “Watch out for your mouth,” she told him, and he wondered whether the other time she
had told him that during the height of his glory it had not been a surprisingly anticipated vision of
his fate. A short time later, when his personal physician finished removing his sores, he asked him,
without showing any particular interest, where the exact location of his heart was. The doctor
listened with his stethoscope and then painted a circle on his cheat with a piece of cotton dipped in
iodine.

The Tuesday of the armistice dawned warm and rainy. Colonel Aureliano Buendía appeared in
the kitchen before five o’clock and had his usual black coffee without sugar. “You came into the
world on a day like this,” Úrsula told him. “Everybody was amazed at your open eyes.” He did not
pay any attention because he was listening to the forming of the troops, the sound of the comets,
and the voices of command that were shattering the dawn. Even though after so many years of war
they should have sounded familiar to him this time he felt the same weakness in his knees and the
same tingling in his skin that he had felt in his youth in the presence of a naked woman. He thought
confusedly, finally captive in a trap of nostalgia, that perhaps if he had married her he would have
been a man without war and without glory, a nameless artisan, a happy animal. That tardy shudder
which had not figured in his forethought made his breakfast bitter. At seven in the morning, when
Colonel Gerineldo Márquez came to fetch him, in the company of a group of rebel officers, he
found him more taciturn than ever, more pensive and solitary. Úrsula tried to throw a new wrap
over his shoulders. “What will the government think,” she told him. “They’ll figure that you’ve
surrendered because you didn’t have anything left to buy a cloak with.” But he would not accept it.
When he was at the door, he let her put an old felt hat of José Arcadio Buendía’s on his head.

“Aureliano,” Úrsula said to him then, “Promise me that if you find that it’s a bad hour for you
there that you’ll think of your mother.”

He gave her a distant smile, raising his hand with all his fingers extended, and without saying a
word he left the house and faced the shouts, insults, and blasphemies that would follow him until he
left the town. Úrsula put the bar on the door, having decided not to take it down for the rest of her
life. “We’ll rot in here,” she thought. “We’ll turn to ashes in this house without men, but we won’t
give this miserable town the pleasure of seeing us weep.” She spent the whole morning looking for a
memory of her son in the most hidden corners, but she could find none.

The ceremony took place fifteen miles from Macondo in the shade of a gigantic ceiba tree around
which the town of Neerlandia would be founded later. The delegates from the government and the


party and the commission of the rebels who were laying down their arms were served by a noisy
group of novices in white habits who looked like a flock of doves that had been frightened by the
rain. Colonel Aureliano Buendía arrived on a muddy mule. He had not shaved, more tormented by
the pain of the sores than by the great failure of his dreams, for he had reached the end of all hope,
beyond glory and the nostalgia of glory. In accordance with his arrangements there was no music,
no fireworks, no pealing bells, no shouts of victory, or any other manifestation that might alter the
mournful character of the armistice. An itinerant photographer who took the only picture of him
that could have been preserved was forced to smash his plates without developing them.

The ceremony lasted only the time necessary to sign the documents. Around the rustic table
placed in the center of a patched circus tent where the delegates sat were the last officers who were
faithful to Colonel Aureliano Buendía. Before taking the signatures, the personal delegate of the
president of the republic tried to read the act of surrender aloud, but Colonel Aureliano Buendía was
against it. “Let’s not waste time on formalities,” he said and prepared to sign the papers without
reading them. One of his officers then broke the soporific silence of the tent.

“Colonel,” he said, “please do us the favor of not being the first to sign.”

Colonel Aureliano Buendía acceded. When the documents went all around the table, in the midst
of a silence that was so pure that one could have deciphered the signatures from the scratching of
the pen on the paper, the first line was still blank. Colonel Aureliano Buendía prepared to fill it.

“Colonel,” another of his officers said, “there’s still time for everything to come out right.”

Without changing his expression, Colonel Aureliano Buendía signed the first copy. He had not
finished signing the last one when a rebel colonel appeared in the doorway leading a mule carrying
two chests. In spite of his entire youth he had a dry look and a patient expression. He was the
treasurer of the revolution in the Macondo region. He had made a difficult journey of six days,
pulling along the mule, who was dying of hunger, in order to arrive at the armistice on time. With an
exasperating parsimony he took down the chests, opened them, and placed on the table, one by one,
seventy-two gold bricks, Everyone had forgotten about the existence of that fortune. In the disorder
of the past year, when the central command fell apart and the revolution degenerated into a bloody
rivalry of leaders, it was impossible to determine any responsibility. The gold of the revolution,
melted into blocks that were then covered with baked clay, was beyond all control. Colonel
Aureliano Buendía had the seventy-two gold bricks included in the inventory of surrender and
closed the ceremony without allowing any speeches. The filthy adolescent stood opposite him,
looking into his eyes with his own calm, syrup-colored eyes.

“Something else?” Colonel Aureliano Buendía asked him.

The young colonel tightened his mouth.

“The receipt,” he said.

Colonel Aureliano Buendía wrote it out in his own hand. Then he had a glass of lemonade and a
piece of biscuit that the novices were passing around and retired to a field tent which had been
prepared for him in case he wished to rest. There he took off his shirt, sat on the edge of the cot,
and at three-fifteen in the afternoon took his pistol and shot himself in the iodine circle that his
personal physician had painted on his chest. At that moment in Macondo Úrsula took the cover off
the pot of milk on the stove, wondering why it was taking so long to boil, and found it full of
worms.

“They’ve killed Aureliano,” she exclaimed.

She looked toward the courtyard, obeying a habit of her solitude, and then she saw José Arcadio
Buendía, soaking wet and sad in the rain and much older than when he had died. “They shot him in
the back,” Úrsula said more precisely, “and no one was charitable enough to close his eyes.” At dusk
through her tears she saw the swift and luminous disks that crossed the sky like an exhalation and
she thought that it was a signal of death. She was still under the chestnut tree, sobbing at her


husband’s knees, when they brought in Colonel Aureliano Buendía, wrapped in a blanket that was
stiff with dry blood and with his eyes open in rage.

He was out of danger. The bullet had followed such a neat path that the doctor was able to put a
cord soaked in iodine in through the chest and withdraw it from the back. “That was my
masterpiece,” he said with satisfaction. “It was the only point where a bullet could pass through
without harming any vital organ.” Colonel Aureliano Buendía saw himself surrounded by charitable
novices who intoned desperate psalms for the repose of his soul and then he was sorry that he had
not shot himself in the roof of the mouth as he had considered doing if only to mock the prediction
of Pilar Ternera.

“If I still had the authority,” he told the doctor, “I’d have you shot out of hand. Not for having
saved my life but for having made a fool of me.”

The failure of his death brought back his lost prestige in a few hours. The same people who
invented the story that he had sold the war for a room with walls made of gold bricks defined the
attempt at suicide as an act of honor and proclaimed him a martyr. Then, when he rejected the
Order of Merit awarded him by the president of the republic, even his most bitter enemies filed
through the room asking him to withdraw recognition of the armistice and to start a new war. The
house was filled with gifts meant as amends. Impressed finally by the massive support of his former
comrades in arms, Colonel Aureliano Buendía did not put aside the possibility of pleasing them. On
the contrary, at a certain moment he seemed so enthusiastic with the idea of a new war that Colonel
Gerineldo Márquez thought that he was only waiting for a pretext to proclaim it. The pretext was
offered, in fact, when the president of the republic refused to award any military pensions to former
combatants, Liberal or Conservative, until each case was examined by a special commission and the
award approved by the congress. “That’s an outrage,” thundered Colonel Aureliano Buendía.
“They’ll die of old age waiting for the mail to come.” For the first time he left the rocker that Úrsula
had bought for his convalescence, and, walking about the bedroom, he dictated a strong message to
the president of the republic. In that telegram which was never made public, he denounced the first
violation of the Treaty of Neerlandia and threatened to proclaim war to the death if the assignment
of pensions was not resolved within two weeks. His attitude was so just that it allowed him to hope
even for the support of former Conservative combatants. But the only reply from the government
was the reinforcement of the military guard that had been placed at the door of his house with the
pretext of protecting him, and the prohibition of all types of visits, Similar methods were adopted all
through the country with other leaders who bore watching. It was an operation that was so timely,
drastic, and effective that two months after the armistice, when Colonel Aureliano Buendía had
recovered, his most dedicated conspirators were dead or exiled or had been assimilated forever into
public administration.

Colonel Aureliano Buendía left his room in December and it was sufficient for him to look at the
porch in order not to think about war again. With a vitality that seemed impossible at her age, Úrsula
had rejuvenated the house again. “Now they’re going to see who I am,” she said when she saw that
her son was going to live. “There won’t be a better, more open house in all the world than this
madhouse.” She had it washed and painted, changed the furniture, restored the garden and planted
new flowers, and opened doors and windows so that the dazzling light of summer would penetrate
even into the bedrooms. She decreed an end to the numerous superimposed periods of mourning
and she herself exchanged her rigorous old gowns for youthful clothing. The music of the pianola
again made the house merry. When she heard it, Amaranta thought of Pietro Crespi, his evening
gardenia, and his smell of lavender, and in the depths of her withered heart a clean rancor flourished,
purified by time. One afternoon when she was trying to put the parlor in order, Úrsula asked for the
help of the soldiers who were guarding the house. The young commander of the guard gave them
permission. Little by little, Úrsula began assigning them new chores. She invited them to eat, gave


them clothing and shoes, and taught them how to read and write. When the government withdrew
the guard, one of them continued living in the house and was in her service for many years. On New
Year’s Day, driven mad by rebuffs from Remedios the Beauty, the young commander of the guard
was found dead under her window.


Chapter 10

YEARS LATER on his deathbed Aureliano Segundo would remember the rainy afternoon in June
when he went into the bedroom to meet his first son. Even though the child was languid and weepy,
with no mark of a Buendía, he did not have to think twice about naming him.

“We’ll call him José Arcadio,” he said.

Fernanda del Carpio, the beautiful woman he had married the year before, agreed. Úrsula, on the
other hand, could not conceal a vague feeling of doubt. Throughout the long history of the family
the insistent repetition of names had made her draw some conclusions that seemed to be certain.
While the Aurelianos were withdrawn, but with lucid minds, the José Arcadios were impulsive and
enterprising, but they were marked with a tragic sign. The only cases that were impossible to classify
were those of José Arcadio Segundo and Aureliano Segundo. They were so much alike and so
mischievous during childhood that not even Santa Sofía de la Piedad could tell them apart. On the
day of their christening Amaranta put bracelets on them with their respective names and dressed
them in different colored clothing marked with each one’s initials, but when they began to go to
school they decided to exchange clothing and bracelets and call each other by opposite names. The
teacher, Melchor Escalona, used to knowing José Arcadio Segundo by his green shirt, went out of
his mind when he discovered that the latter was wearing Aureliano Segundo’s bracelet and that the
other one said, nevertheless, that his name was Aureliano Segundo in spite of the fact that he was
wearing the white shirt and the bracelet with José Arcadio Segundo’s name. From then on he was
never sure who was who. Even when they grew up and life made them different. Úrsula still
wondered if they themselves might not have made a mistake in some moment of their intricate game
of confusion and had become changed forever. Until the beginning of adolescence they were two
synchronized machines. They would wake up at the same time, have the urge to go to the bathroom
at the same time, suffer the same upsets in health, and they even dreamed about the same things. In
the house, where it was thought that they coordinated their actions with a simple desire to confuse,
no one realized what really was happening until one day when Santa Sofía de la Piedad gave one of
them a glass of lemonade and as soon as he tasted it the other one said that it needed sugar. Santa
Sofía de la Piedad, who had indeed forgotten to put sugar in the lemonade, told Úrsula about it.
“That’s what they’re all like,” she said without surprise. “crazy from birth.” In time things became
less disordered. The one who came out of the game of confusion with the name of Aureliano
Segundo grew to monumental size like his grandfathers, and the one who kept the name of José
Arcadio Segundo grew to be bony like the colonel, and the only thing they had in common was the
family’s solitary air. Perhaps it was that crossing of stature, names, and character that made Úrsula
suspect that they had been shuffled like a deck of cards since childhood.

The decisive difference was revealed in the midst of the war, when José Arcadio Segundo asked
Colonel Gerineldo Márquez to let him see an execution. Against Úrsula’s better judgment his wishes
were satisfied. Aureliano Segundo, on the other hand, shuddered at the mere idea of witnessing an
execution. He preferred to stay home. At the age of twelve he asked Úrsula what was in the locked
room. “Papers,” she answered. “Melquíades’ books and the strange things that he wrote in his last
years.” Instead of calming him, the answer increased his curiosity. He demanded so much, promised
with such insistence that he would not mistreat the things, that Úrsula, gave him the keys. No one
had gone into the room again since they had taken Melquíades’ body out and had put on the door a
padlock whose parts had become fused together with rust. But when Aureliano Segundo opened the
windows a familiar light entered that seemed accustomed to lighting the room every day and there
was not the slightest trace of dust or cobwebs, with everything swept and clean, better swept and


cleaner than on the day of the burial, and the ink had not dried up in the inkwell nor had oxidation
diminished the shine of the metals nor had the embers gone out under the water pipe where José
Arcadio Buendía had vaporized mercury. On the shelves were the books bound in a cardboard-like
material, pale, like tanned human skin, and the manuscripts were intact. In spite of the room’s
having been shut up for many years, the air seemed fresher than in the rest of the house. Everything
was so recent that several weeks later, when Úrsula went into the room with a pail of water and a
brush to wash the floor, there was nothing for her to do. Aureliano Segundo was deep in the reading
of a book. Although it had no cover and the title did not appear anywhere, the boy enjoyed the story
of a woman who sat at a table and ate nothing but kernels of rice, which she picked up with a pin,
and the story of the fisherman who borrowed a weight for his net from a neighbor and when he
gave him a fish in payment later it had a diamond in its stomach, and the one about the lamp that
fulfilled wishes and about flying carpets. Surprised, he asked Úrsula if all that was true and she
answered him that it was, that many years ago the gypsies had brought magic lamps and flying mats
to Macondo.

“What’s happening,” she sighed, “is that the world is slowly coming to an end and those things
don’t come here any more.”

When he finished the book, in which many of the stories had no endings because there were
pages missing, Aureliano Segundo set about deciphering the manuscripts. It was impossible. The
letters looked like clothes hung out to dry on a line and they looked more like musical notation than
writing. One hot noontime, while he was poring over the, manuscripts, he sensed that he was not
alone in the room. Against the light from the window, sitting with his hands on his knees, was
Melquíades. He was under forty years of age. He was wearing the same old-fashioned vest and the
hat that looked like a raven’s wings, and across his pale temples there flowed the grease from his hair
that had been melted by the heat, just as Aureliano and José Arcadio had seen him when they were
children. Aureliano Segundo recognized him at once, because that hereditary memory had been
transmitted from generation to generation and had come to him through the memory of his
grandfather.

“Hello,” Aureliano Segundo said.

“Hello, young man,” said Melquíades.

From then on, for several years, they saw each other almost every afternoon. Melquíades talked
to him about the world, tried to infuse him with his old wisdom, but he refused to translate the
manuscripts. “No one must know their meaning until he has reached one hundred years of age,” he
explained. Aureliano kept those meetings secret forever. On one occasion he felt that his private
world had fallen apart because Úrsula came in when Melquíades was in the room. But she did not
see him.

“Who were you talking to?” she asked him.

“Nobody,” Aureliano Segundo said.

“That’s what your great-grandfather did,” Úrsula, said. “He used to talk to himself too.”

José Arcadio Segundo, in the meantime, had satisfied his wish to see a shooting. For the rest of
his life he would remember the livid flash of the six simultaneous shots-and the echo of the
discharge as it broke against the hills and the sad smile and perplexed eyes of the man being shot,
who stood erect while his shirt became soaked with blood, and who was still smiling even when they
untied him from the post and put him in a box filled with quicklime. “He’s alive,” he thought.
“They’re going to bury him alive.” It made such an impression on him that from then on he
detested military practices and war, not because of the executions but because of the horrifying
custom of burying the victims alive. No one knew then exactly when he began to ring the bells in
the church tower and assist Father Antonio Isabel, the successor to “The Pup,” at mass, and take
can of the fighting cocks in the courtyard of the parish house. When Colonel Gerineldo Márquez


found out he scolded him strongly for learning occupations repudiated by the Liberals. “The fact is,”
he answered, “I think I’ve turned out to be a Conservative.” He believed it as if it had been
determined by fate. Colonel Gerineldo Márquez, scandalized, told Úrsula about it.

“It’s better that way,” she approved. “Let’s hope that he becomes a priest so that God will finally
come into this house.”

It was soon discovered that Father Antonio Isabel was preparing him for his first communion.
He was teaching him the catechism as he shaved the necks of his roosters. He explained to him with
simple examples, as he put the brooding hens into their nests, how it had occurred to God on the
second day of creation that chickens would be formed inside of an egg. From that time on the
parish priest began to show the signs of senility that would lead him to say years later that the devil
had probably won his rebellion against God, and that he was the one who sat on the heavenly
throne, without revealing his true identity in order to trap the unwary. Warmed up by the persistence
of his mentor, in a few months José Arcadio Segundo came to be as adept in theological tricks used
to confuse the devil as he was skilled in the tricks of the cockpit. Amaranta made him a linen suit
with a collar and tie, bought him a pair of white shoes, and engraved his name in gilt letters on the
ribbon of the candle. Two nights before the first communion, Father Antonio Isabel closeted
himself with him in the sacristy to hear his confession with the help of a dictionary of sins. It was
such a long list that the aged priest, used to going to bed at six o’clock, fell asleep in his chair before
it was over. The interrogation was a revelation for José Arcadio Segundo. It did not surprise him
that the priest asked him if he had done bad things with women, and he honestly answered no, but
he was upset with the question as to whether he had done them with animals. The first Friday in
May he received communion, tortured by curiosity. Later on he asked Petronio, the sickly sexton
who lived in the belfry and who, according to what they said, fed himself on bats, about it, and
Petronio, answered him: “There are some corrupt Christians who do their business with female
donkeys.” José Arcadio Segundo still showed so much curiosity and asked so many questions that
Petronio lost his patience.

“I go Tuesday nights,” he confessed. “if you promise not to tell anyone I’ll take you next
Tuesday.”

Indeed, on the following Tuesday Petronio came down out of the tower with a wooden stool
which until then no one had known the use of, and he took José Arcadio Segundo to a nearby
pasture. The boy became so taken with those nocturnal raids that it was a long time before he was
seen at Catarino’s. He became a cockfight man. “Take those creatures somewhere else,” Úrsula
ordered him the first time she saw him come in with his fine fighting birds. “Roosters have already
brought too much bitterness to this house for you to bring us any more.” José Arcadio Segundo
took them away without any argument, but he continued breeding them at the house of Pilar
Ternera, his grandmother, who gave him everything he needed in exchange for having him in her
house. He soon displayed in the cockpit the wisdom that Father Antonio Isabel had given him, and
he made enough money not only to enrich his brood but also to look for a man’s satisfactions.
Úrsula compared him with his brother at that time and could not understand how the twins, who
looked like the same person in childhood, had ended up so differently. Her perplexity did not last
very long, for quite soon Aureliano Segundo began to show signs of laziness and dissipation. While
he was shut up in Melquíades’ room he was drawn into himself the way Colonel Aureliano Buendía
had been in his youth. But a short time after the Treaty of Neerlandia, a piece of chance took him
out of his withdrawn self and made him face the reality of the world. A young woman who was
selling numbers for the raffle of an accordion greeted him with a great deal of familiarity. Aureliano
Segundo was not surprised, for he was frequently confused with his brother. But he did not clear up
the mistake, not even when the girl tried to soften his heart with sobs, and she ended taking him to
her room. She liked him so much from that first meeting that she fixed things so that he would win


the accordion in the raffle. At the end of two weeks Aureliano Segundo realized that the woman had
been going to bed alternately with him and his brother, thinking that they were the same man, and
instead of making things clear, he arranged to prolong the situation. He did not return to
Melquíades’ room. He would spend his afternoons in the courtyard, learning to play the accordion
by ear over the protests of Úrsula, who at that time had forbidden music in the house because of the
mourning and who, in addition, despised the accordion as an instrument worthy only of the
vagabond heirs of Francisco the Man. Nevertheless, Aureliano Segundo became a virtuoso on the
accordion and he still was after he had married and had children and was one of the most respected
men in Macondo.

For almost two months he shared the woman with his brother. He would watch him, mix up his
plans, and when he was sure that José Arcadio Segundo was not going to visit their common
mistress that night, he would go and sleep with her. One morning he found that he was sick. Two
days later he found his brother clinging to a beam in the bathroom, soaked in sweat and with tears
pouring down, and then he understood. His brother confessed to him that the woman had sent him
away because he had given her what she called a low-life sickness. He also told him how Pilar
Ternera had tried to cure him. Aureliano Segundo submitted secretly to the burning baths of
permanganate and to diuretic waters, and both were cured separately after three months of secret
suffering. José Arcadio Segundo did not see the woman again. Aureliano Segundo obtained her
pardon and stayed with her until his death.

Her name was Petra Cotes. She had arrived in Macondo in the middle of the war with a chalice
husband who lived off raffles, and when the man died she kept up the business. She was a clean
young mulatto woman with yellow almond-shaped eyes that gave her face the ferocity of a panther,
but she had a generous heart and a magnificent vocation for love. When Úrsula realized that José
Arcadio Segundo was a cockfight man and that Aureliano Segundo played the accordion at his
concubine’s noisy parties, she thought she would go mad with the combination. It was as if the
defects of the family and none of the virtues had been concentrated in both. Then she decided that
no one again would be called Aureliano or José Arcadio. Yet when Aureliano Segundo had his first
son she did not dare go against his will.

“All right,” Úrsula said, “but on one condition: I will bring him up.”

Although she was already a hundred years old and on the point of going blind from cataracts, she
still had her physical dynamism, her integrity of character, and her mental balance intact. No one
would be better able than she to shape the virtuous man who would restore the prestige of the
family, a man who would never have heard talk of war, fighting cocks, bad women, or wild
undertakings, four calamities that, according to what Úrsula thought, had determined the downfall.
of their line. “This one will be a priest,” she promised solemnly. “And if God gives me life he’ll be
Pope someday.” They all laughed when they heard her, not only in the bedroom but all through the
house, where Aureliano Segundo’s rowdy friends were gathered. The war, relegated to the attic of
bad memories, was momentarily recalled with the popping of champagne bottles.

“To the health of the Pope,” Aureliano Segundo toasted.

The guests toasted in a chorus. Then the man of the house played the accordion, fireworks were
set off, and drums celebrated the event throughout the town. At dawn the guests, soaked in
champagne, sacrificed six cows and put them in the street at the disposal of the crowd. No one was
scandalized. Since Aureliano Segundo had taken charge of the house those festivities were a
common thing, even when there was no motive as proper as the birth of a Pope. In a few years,
without effort, simply by luck, he had accumulated one of the largest fortunes in the swamp thanks
to the supernatural proliferation of his animals. His mares would bear triplets, his hens laid twice a
day, and his hogs fattened with such speed that no one could explain such disorderly fecundity
except through the use of black magic. “Save something now,” Úrsula would tell her wild great-


grandson. “This luck is not going to last all your life.” But Aureliano Segundo paid no attention to
her. The more he opened champagne to soak his friends, the more wildly his animals gave birth and
the more he was convinced that his lucky star was not a matter of his conduct but an influence of
Petra Cotes, his concubine, whose love had the virtue of exasperating nature. So convinced was he
that this was the origin of his fortune that he never kept Petra Cotes far away from his breeding
grounds and even when he married and had children he continued living with her with the consent
of Fernanda. Solid, monumental like his grandfathers, but with a joie de vivre and an irresistible
good humor that they did not have, Aureliano Segundo scarcely had time to look after his animals.
All he had to do was to take Petra Cores to his breeding grounds and have her ride across his land in
order to have every animal marked with his brand succumb to the irremediable plague of
proliferation.

Like all the good things that occurred in his long life, that tremendous fortune had its origins in
chance. Until the end of the wars Petra Cotes continued to support herself with the returns from her
raffles and Aureliano Segundo was able to sack Úrsula’s savings from time to time. They were a
frivolous couple, with no other worries except going to bed every night, even on forbidden days,
and frolicking there until dawn. “That woman has been your ruination,” Úrsula would shout at her
great-grandson when she saw him coming into the house like a sleepwalker. “She’s got you so
bewitched that one of these days I’m going to see you twisting around with colic and with a toad in
your belly.” José Arcadio Segundo, who took a long time to discover that he had been supplanted,
was unable to understand his brother’s passion. He remembered Petra Cotes as an ordinary woman,
rather lazy in bed, and completely lacking in any resources for lovemaking. Deaf to Úrsula’s clamor
and the teasing of his brother, Aureliano Segundo only thought at that time of finding a trade that
would allow him to maintain a house for Petra Cotes, and to die with her, on top of her and under-
neath her, during a night of feverish license. When Colonel Aureliano Buendía opened up his
workshop again, seduced at last by the peaceful charms of old age, Aureliano Segundo thought that
it would be good business to devote himself to the manufacture of little gold fishes. He spent many
hours in the hot room watching how the hard sheets of metal, worked by the colonel with the
inconceivable patience of disillusionment, were slowly being converted into golden scales. The work
seemed so laborious to him and the thought of Petra Cotes was so persistent and pressing that after
three weeks he disappeared from the workshop. It was during that time that it occurred to Petra
Cotes to raffle off rabbits. They reproduced and grew up so fast that there was barely time to sell the
tickets for the raffle. At first Aureliano Segundo did not notice the alarming proportions of the
proliferation. But one night, when nobody in town wanted to hear about the rabbit raffle any more,
he heard a noise by the courtyard door. “Don’t get worried,” Petra, Cotes said. “It’s only the
rabbits.” They could not sleep, tormented by the uproar of the animals. At dawn Aureliano Segundo
opened the door and saw the courtyard paved with rabbits, blue in the glow of dawn. Petra Cotes,
dying with laughter, could not resist the temptation of teasing him.

“Those are the ones who were born last night,” she aid.

“Oh my God!” he said. “Why don’t you raffle off cows?”

A few days later, in an attempt to clean out her courtyard, Petra Cotes exchanged the rabbits for a
cow, who two months later gave birth to triplets. That was how things began. Overnight Aureliano
Segundo be. came the owner of land and livestock and he barely had time to enlarge his overflowing
barns and pigpens. It was a delirious prosperity that even made him laugh, and he could not help
doing crazy things to release his good humor. “Cease, cows, life is short,” he would shout. Úrsula
wondered what entanglements he had got into, whether he might be stealing, whether he had
become a rustler, and every time she saw him uncorking champagne just for the pleasure of pouring
the foam over his head, she would shout at him and scold him for the waste. It annoyed him so
much that one day when he awoke in a merry mood, Aureliano Segundo appeared with a chest full


of money, a can of paste, and a brush, and singing at the top of his lungs the old songs of Francisco
the Man, he papered the house inside and out and from top to bottom, with one-peso banknotes.
The old mansion, painted white since the time they had brought the pianola, took on the strange
look of a mosque. In the midst of the excitement of the family the scandalization of Úrsula, the joy
of the people cramming the street to watch that apotheosis of squandering. Aureliano Segundo
finished by papering the house from the front to the kitchen, including bathrooms and bedrooms,
and threw the leftover bills into the courtyard.

“Now,” he said in a final way, “I hope that nobody in this house ever talks to me about money
again.”

That was what happened. Úrsula had the bills taken down, stuck to great cakes of whitewash, and
the house was painted white again. “Dear Lord,” she begged, “make us poor again the way we were
when we founded this town so that you will not collect for this squandering in the other life.” Her
prayers were answered in reverse. One of the workmen removing the bills bumped into an
enormous plaster statue of Saint Joseph that someone had left in the house during the last years of
the war and the hollow figure broke to pieces on the floor. It had been stuffed with gold coins. No
one could remember who had brought that life-sized saint. “Three men brought it,” Amaranta
explained. “They asked us to keep it until the rains were over and I told them to put it there in the
corner where nobody would bump into it, and there they put it, very carefully, and there it’s been
ever since because they never came back for it.” Later on, Úrsula had put candles on it and had
prostrated herself before it, not suspecting that instead of a saint she was adoring almost four
bundled pounds of gold. The tardy evidence of her involuntary paganism made her even more
upset. She spat on the spectacular pile of coins, put them in three canvas sacks, and buried them in a
secret place, hoping that sooner or later the three unknown men would come to reclaim them. Much
later, during the difficult years of her decrepitude, Úrsula would intervene in the conversations of
the many travelers who came by the house at that time and ask them if they had left a plaster Saint
Joseph there during the war to be taken care of until the rains passed.

Things like that which gave Úrsula such consternation, were commonplace in those days.
Macondo was swamped in a miraculous prosperity. The adobe houses of the founders had been
replaced by brick buildings with wooden blinds and cement floors which made the suffocating heat
of two o’clock in the afternoon more bearable. All that remained at that time of José Arcadio
Buendía’s ancient village were the dusty almond trees, destined to resist the most arduous of
circumstances, and the river of clear water whose prehistoric stones had been pulverized by the
frantic hammers of José Arcadio Segundo when he set about opening the channel in order to
establish a boat line. It was a mad dream, comparable to those of his great-grandfather, for the rocky
riverbed and the numerous rapids prevented navigation from Macondo to the sea. But José Arcadio
Segundo, in an unforeseen burst of temerity, stubbornly kept on with the project. Until then he had
shown no sign of imagination. Except for his precarious adventure with Petra Cotes, he had never
known a woman. Úrsula had considered him the quietest example the family had ever produced in
all its history, incapable of standing out even as a handler of fighting cocks, when Colonel Aureliano
Buendía told him the story of the Spanish galleon aground eight miles from the sea, the carbonized
frame of which he had seen himself during the war. The story, which for so many years had seemed
fantastic to so many people, was a revelation for José Arcadio Segundo. He auctioned off his
roosters to the highest bidder, recruited men, bought tools, and set about the awesome task of
breaking stones, digging canals, clearing away rapids, and even harnessing waterfalls. “I know all of
this by heart,” Úrsula would shout. “It’s as if time had turned around and we were back at the
beginning.” When he thought that the river was navigable, José Arcadio Segundo gave his brother a
detailed account of his plans and the latter gave him the money he needed for the enterprise. He
disappeared for a long time. It had been said that his plan to buy a boat was nothing but a trick to


make off with his brother’s money when the news spread that a strange craft was approaching the
town. The inhabitants of Macondo, who no longer remembered the colossal undertakings of José
Arcadio Buendía, ran to the riverbank and saw with eyes popping in disbelief the arrival of the first
and last boat ever to dock in the town. It was nothing but a log raft drawn by thick ropes pulled by
twenty men who walked along the bank. In the prow, with a glow of satisfaction in his eyes, José
Arcadio Segundo was directing the arduous maneuver. There arrived with him a rich group of
splendid matrons who were protecting themselves from the burning sun with gaudy parasols, and
wore on their shoulders fine silk kerchiefs, with colored creams on their faces and natural flowers in
their hair and golden serpents on their arms and diamonds in their teeth. The log raft was the only
vessel that José Arcadio Segundo was able to bring to Macondo, and only once, but he never
recognized the failure of his enterprise, but proclaimed his deed as a victory of will power. He gave a
scrupulous accounting to his brother and very soon plunged back into the routine of cockfights. The
only thing that remained of that unfortunate venture was the breath of renovation that the matrons
from France brought, as their magnificent arts transformed traditional methods of love and their
sense of social well-being abolished Catarino’s antiquated place and turned the street into a bazaar of
Japanese lanterns and nostalgic hand organs. They were the promoters of the bloody carnival that
plunged Macondo into delirium for three days and whose only lasting consequence was having given
Aureliano Segundo the opportunity to meet Fernanda del Carpio.

Remedios the Beauty was proclaimed queen. Úrsula, who shuddered at the disquieted beauty of
her great-granddaughter, could not prevent the choice. Until then she had succeeded in keeping her
off the streets unless it was to go to mass with Amaranta, but she made her cover her face with a
black shawl. The most impious men, those who would disguise themselves as priests to say
sacrilegious masses in Catarino’s store, would go to church with an aim to see, if only for an instant,
the face of Remedios the Beauty, whose legendary good looks were spoken of with alarming
excitement throughout the swamp. It was a long time before they were able to do so, and it would
have been better for them if they never had, because most of them never recovered their peaceful
habits of sleep. The man who made it possible, a foreigner, lost his serenity forever, became
involved in the sloughs of abjection and misery, and years later was cut to pieces by a train after he
had fallen asleep on the tracks. From the moment he was seen in the church, wearing a green velvet
suit and an embroidered vest, no one doubted that he came from far away, perhaps from some
distant city outside of the country, attracted by the magical fascination of Remedios the Beauty. He
was so handsome, so elegant and dignified, with such presence, that Pietro Crespi would have been
a mere fop beside him and many women whispered with spiteful smiles that he was the one who
really should have worn the shawl. He did not speak to anyone in Macondo. He appeared at dawn
on Sunday like a prince in a fairy tale, riding a horse with silver stirrups and a velvet blanket, and he
left town after mass.

The power of his presence was such that from the first time he was seen in the church everybody
took it for granted that a silent and tense duel had been established between him and Remedios the
Beauty, a secret pact, an irrevocable challenge that would end not only in love but also in death. On
the sixth Sunday the gentleman appeared with a yellow rose in his hand. He heard mass standing, as
he always did, and at the end he stepped in front of Remedios the Beauty and offered her the
solitary rose. She took it with a natural gesture, as if she had been prepared for that homage, and
then she uncovered her face and gave her thanks with a smile. That was all she did. Not only for the
gentleman, but for all the men who had the unfortunate privilege of seeing her, that was an eternal
instant.

From then on the gentleman had a band of musicians play beside the window of Remedios the
Beauty, sometimes until dawn. Aureliano Segundo was the only one who felt a cordial compassion
for him and he tried to break his perseverance. “Don’t waste your time any more,” he told him one


night. “The women in this house are worse than mules.” He offered him his friendship, invited him
to bathe in champagne, tried to make him understand that the females of his family had insides
made of flint, but he could not weaken his obstinacy. Exasperated by the interminable nights of
music, Colonel Aureliano Buendía threatened to cure his affliction with a few pistol shots. Nothing
made him desist except his own lamentable state of demoralization. From a well-dressed and neat
individual he became filthy and ragged. It was rumored that he had abandoned power and fortune in
his distant nation, although his origins were actually never known. He became argumentative, a
barroom brawler, and he would wake up rolling in his own filth in Catarino’s store. The saddest part
of his drama was that Remedios the Beauty did not notice him not even when he appeared in church
dressed like a prince. She accepted the yellow rose without the least bit of malice, amused, rather, by
the extravagance of the act, and she lifted her shawl to see his face better, not to show hers.

Actually, Remedios the Beauty was not a creature of this world. Until she was well along in
puberty Santa Sofía de la. Piedad had to bathe and dress her, and even when she could take care of
herself it was necessary to keep an eye on her so that she would not paint little animals on the walls
with a stick daubed in her own excrement. She reached twenty without knowing how to read or
write, unable to use the silver at the table, wandering naked through the house because her nature
rejected all manner of convention. When the young commander of the guard declared his love for
her, she rejected him simply because his frivolity startled her. “See how simple he is,” she told
Amaranta. “He says that he’s dying because of me, as if I were a bad case of colic.” When, indeed,
they found him dead beside her window, Remedios the Beauty confirmed her first impression.

“You see,” she commented. “He was a complete Simpleton.”

It seemed as if some penetrating lucidity permitted her to see the reality of things beyond any
formalism. That at least was the point of view of Colonel Aureliano Buendía, for whom Remedios
the Beauty was in no way mentally retarded, as was generally believed, but quite the opposite. “It’s as
if she’s come back from twenty years of war,” he would say. Úrsula, for her part, thanked God for
having awarded the family with a creature of exceptional purity, but at the same time she was
disturbed by her beauty, for it seemed a contradictory virtue to her, a diabolical trap at the center of
her innocence. It was for that reason that she decided to keep her away from the world, to protect
her from all earthly temptation, not knowing that Remedios the Beauty, even from the time when
she was in her mother’s womb, was safe from any contagion. It never entered her head that they
would elect her beauty queen of the carnival pandemonium. But Aureliano, Segundo, excited at the
caprice of disguising himself as a tiger, brought Father Antonio Isabel to the house in order to
convince Úrsula that the carnival was not a pagan feast, as she said, but a Catholic tradition. Finally
convinced, even though reluctantly, she consented to the coronation.

The news that Remedios Buendía was going to be the sovereign ruler of the festival went beyond
the limits of the swamp in a few hours, reached distant places where the prestige of her beauty was
not known, and it aroused the anxiety of those who still thought of her last name as a symbol of
subversion. The anxiety was baseless. If anyone had become harmless at that time it was the aging
and disillusioned Colonel Aureliano Buendía, who was slowly losing all contact with the reality of
the nation. Enclosed in his workshop, his only relationship with the rest of the world was his
business in little gold fishes. One of the soldiers who had guarded his house during the first days of
peace would go sell them in the villages of the swamp and return loaded down with coins and news.
That the Conservative government, he would say, with the backing of the Liberals, was reforming
the calendar so that every president could remain in power for a hundred years. That the concordat
with the Holy See had finally been signed and a cardinal had come from Rome with a crown of
diamonds and a throne of solid gold, and that the Liberal ministers had had their pictures taken on
their knees in the act of kissing his ring. That the leading lady of a Spanish company passing through
the capital had been kidnapped by a band of masked highwaymen and on the following Sunday she


had danced in the nude at the summer house of the president of the republic. “Don’t talk to me
about politics,” the colonel would tell him. “Our business is selling little fishes.” The rumor that he
did not want to hear anything about the situation in the country because he was growing rich in his
workshop made Úrsula laugh when it reached her ears. With her terrible practical sense she could
not understand the colonel’s business as he exchanged little fishes for gold coins and then converted
the coins into little fishes, and so on, with the result that he had to work all the harder with the more
he sold in order to satisfy an exasperating vicious circle. Actually, what interested him was not the
business but the work. He needed so much concentration to link scales, fit minute rubies into the
eyes, laminate gills, and put on fins that there was not the smallest empty moment left for him to fill
with his disillusionment of the war. So absorbing was the attention required by the delicacy of his
artistry that in a short time he had aged more than during all the years of the war, and his position
had twisted his spine and the close work had used up his eyesight, but the implacable concentration
awarded him with a peace of the spirit. The last time he was seen to take an interest in some matter
related to the war was when a group of veterans from both parties sought his support for the
approval of lifetime pensions, which had always been promised and were always about to be put into
effect. “Forget about it,” he told them. “You can see how I refuse my pension in order to get rid of
the torture of waiting for it until the day I died.” At first Colonel Gerineldo Márquez would visit him
at dusk and they would both sit in the street door and talk about the past. But Amaranta could not
bear the memories that that man, whose baldness had plunged him into the abyss of premature old
age, aroused in her, and she would torment him with snide remarks until he did not come back
except on special occasions and he finally disappeared, extinguished by paralysis. Taciturn, silent,
insensible to the new breath of vitality that was shaking the house, Colonel Aureliano Buendía could
understand only that the secret of a good old age is simply an honorable pact with solitude. He
would get up at five in the morning after a light sleep, have his eternal mug of bitter coffee in the
kitchen, shut himself up all day in the workshop, and at four in the afternoon he would go along the
porch dragging a stool, not even noticing the fire of the rose bushes or the brightness of the hour or
the persistence of Amaranta, whose melancholy made the noise of a boiling pot, which was perfectly
perceptible at dusk, and he would sit in the street door as long as the mosquitoes would allow him
to. Someone dared to disturb his solitude once.

“How are you, Colonel?” he asked in passing.

“Right here,” he answered. “Waiting for my funeral procession to pass.”

So that the anxiety caused by the public reappearance of his family name, having to do with the
coronation of Remedios the Beauty, was baseless. Many people did not think that way, however.
Innocent of the tragedy that threatened it, the town poured into the main square in a noisy
explosion of merriment. The carnival had reached its highest level of madness and Aureliano
Segundo had satisfied at last his dream of dressing up like a tiger and was walking along the wild
throng, hoarse from so much roaring, when on the swamp road a parade of several people appeared
carrying in a gilded litter the most fascinating woman that imagination could conceive. For a
moment the inhabitants of Macondo took off their masks in order to get a better look at the
dazzling creature with a crown of emeralds and an ermine cape, who seemed invested with
legitimate authority, and was not merely a sovereign of bangles and crepe paper. There were many
people who had sufficient insight to suspect that it was a question of provocation. But Aureliano
Segundo immediately conquered his perplexity and declared the new arrivals to be guests of honor,
and with the wisdom of Solomon he seated Remedios the Beauty and the intruding queen on the
same dais. Until midnight the strangers, disguised as bedouins, took part in the delirium and even
enriched it with sumptuous fireworks and acrobatic skills that made one think of the art of the
gypsies. Suddenly, during the paroxysm of the celebration, someone broke the delicate balance.

“Long live the Liberal party!” he shouted. “Long live Colonel Aureliano Buendía!”


The rifle shots drowned out the splendor of the fireworks and the cries of terror drowned out the
music and joy turned into panic. Many years later there were those who still insisted that the royal
guard of the intruding queen was a squad of regular army soldiers who were concealing government-
issue rifles under their rich Moorish robes. The government denied the charge in a special
proclamation and promised a complete investigation of the bloody episode. But the truth never
came to light, and the version always prevailed that the royal guard, without provocation of any kind,
took up combat positions upon a signal from their commander and opened fire without pity on the
crowd. When calm was restored, not one of the false bedouins remained in town and there were
many dead and wounded lying on the square: nine clowns, four Columbines, seventeen playing-card
kings, one devil, three minstrels, two peers of France, and three Japanese empresses. In the confu-
sion of the panic José Arcadio Segundo managed to rescue Remedios the Beauty and Aureliano
Segundo carried the intruding queen to the house in his arms, her dress torn and the ermine cape
stained with blood. Her name was Fernanda del Carpio. She had been chosen as the most beautiful
of the five thousand most beautiful women in the land and they had brought her to Macondo with
the promise of naming her Queen of Madagascar. Úrsula took care of her as if she were her own
daughter. The town, instead of doubting her innocence, pitied her candor. Six months after the
massacre, when the wounded had recovered and the last flowers on the mass grave had withered,
Aureliano Segundo went to fetch her from the distant city where she lived with her father and he
married her in Macondo with a noisy celebration that lasted twenty days.


Chapter 11

THE MARRIAGE was on the point of breaking up after two months because Aureliano Segundo, in
an attempt to placate Petra Cotes, had a picture taken of her dressed as the Queen of Madagascar.
When Fernanda found out about it she repacked her bridal trunks and left Macondo without saying
good-bye. Aureliano Segundo caught up with her on the swamp road. After much pleading and
promises of reform he succeeded in getting her to come home and he abandoned his concubine.

Petra Cotes, aware of her strength, showed no signs of worry. She had made a man of him. While
he was still a child she had drawn him out of Melquíades’ room, his head full of fantastic ideas and
lacking any contact with reality, and she had given him a place in the world. Nature had made him
reserved and withdrawn. with tendencies toward solitary meditation, and she had molded an
opposite character in him, one that was vital, expansive, open, and she had injected him with a joy
for living and a pleasure in spending and celebrating until she had converted him inside and out, into
the man she had dreamed of for herself ever since adolescence. Then he married, as all sons marry
sooner or later. He did not dare tell her the news. He assumed an attitude that was quite childish
under the circumstances, feigning anger and imaginary resentment so that Petra Cotes would be the
one who would bring about the break. One day, when Aureliano Segundo reproached her unjustly,
she eluded the trap and put things in their proper place.

“What it all means,” she said, “is that you want to marry the queen.”

Aureliano Segundo, ashamed, pretended an attack of rage, said that he was misunderstood and
abused, and did not visit her again. Petra Cotes, without losing her poise of a wild beast in repose
for a single instant, heard the music and the fireworks from the wedding, the wild bustle of the
celebration as if all of it were nothing but some new piece of mischief on the part of Aureliano
Segundo. Those who pitied her fate were calmed with a smile. “Don’t worry,” she told them.
“Queens run errands for me.” To a neighbor woman who brought her a set of candles so that she
could light up the picture of her lost lover with them, she said with an enigmatic security:

“The only candle that will make him come is always lighted.”

Just as she had foreseen, Aureliano Segundo went back to her house as soon as the honeymoon
was over. He brought his usual old friends, a traveling photographer, and the gown and ermine cape
soiled with blood that Fernanda had worn during the carnival. In the heat of the merriment that
broke out that evening, he had Petra Cotes dress up as queen, crowned her absolute and lifetime
ruler of Madagascar, and handed out copies of the picture to his friends, she not only went along
with the game, but she felt sorry for him inside, thinking that he must have been very frightened to
have conceived of that extravagant means of reconciliation. At seven in the evening, still dressed as
the queen, she received him in bed. He had been married scarcely two months, but she realized at
once that things were not going well in the nuptial bed, and she had the delicious pleasure of
vengeance fulfilled. Two days later, however, when he did not dare return but sent an intermediary
to arrange the terms of the separation, she understood that she was going to need more patience
than she had foreseen because he seemed ready to sacrifice himself for the sake of appearances. Nor
did she get upset that time. Once again she made things easy with a submission that confirmed the
generalized belief that she was a poor devil, and the only souvenir she kept of Aureliano Segundo
was a pair of patent leather boots, which, according to what he himself had said, were the ones he
wanted to wear in his coffin. She kept them wrapped in cloth in the bottom of a trunk and made
ready to feed on memories, waiting without despair.

“He has to come sooner or later,” she told herself, “even if it’s just to put on those boots.”


She did not have to wait as long as she had imagined. Actually, Aureliano Segundo understood
from the night of his wedding that he would return to the house of Petra Cotes much sooner than
when he would have to put on the patent leather boots: Fernanda was a woman who was lost in the
world. She had been born and raised in a city six hundred miles away, a gloomy city where on
ghostly nights the coaches of the viceroys still rattled through the cobbled streets, Thirty-two
belfries tolled a dirge at six in the afternoon. In the manor house, which was paved with tomblike
slabs, the sun was never seen. The air had died in the cypresses in the courtyard, in the pale
trappings of the bedrooms, in the dripping archways of the garden of perennials. Until puberty
Fernanda had no news of the world except for the melancholy piano lessons taken in some
neighboring house by someone who for years and years had the drive not to take a siesta. In the
room of her sick mother, green and yellow under the powdery light from the windowpanes, she
would listen to the methodical, stubborn, heartless scales and think that that music was in the world
while she was being consumed as she wove funeral wreaths. Her mother, perspiring with five-
o’clock fever, spoke to her of the splendor of the past. When she was a little girl, on one moonlit
night Fernanda saw a beautiful woman dressed in white crossing the garden toward the chapel. What
bothered her most about that fleeting vision was that she felt it was exactly like her, as if she had
seen herself twenty years in advance. “It was your great-grandmother the queen,” her mother told
her during a truce in her coughing. “She died of some bad vapors while she was cutting a string of
bulbs.” Many years later, when she began to feel she was the equal of her great-grandmother,
Fernanda doubted her childhood vision, but her mother scolded her disbelief.

“We are immensely rich and powerful,” she told her. “One day you will be a queen.”

She believed it, even though they were sitting at the long table with a linen tablecloth and silver
service to have a cup of watered chocolate and a sweet bun. Until the day of her wedding she
dreamed about a legendary kingdom, in spite of the fact that her father, Don Fernando, had to
mortgage the house in order to buy her trousseau. It was not innocence or delusions of grandeur.
That was how they had brought her up. Since she had had the use of reason she remembered having
done her duty in a gold pot with the family crest on it. She left the house for the first time at the age
of twelve in a coach and horses that had to travel only two blocks to take her to the convent. Her
classmates were surprised that she sat apart from them in a chair with a very high back and that she
would not even mingle with them during recess. “She’s different,” the nuns would explain. “She’s
going to be a queen.” Her schoolmates believed this because she was already the most beautiful,
distinguished, and discreet girl they had ever seen. At the end of eight years, after having learned to
write Latin poetry, play the clavichord, talk about falconry with gentlemen and apologetics, with
archbishops, discuss affairs of state with foreign rulers and affairs of God with the Pope, she
returned to her parents’ home to weave funeral wreaths. She found it despoiled. All that was left was
the furniture that was absolutely necessary, the silver candelabra and table service, for the everyday
utensils had been sold one by one to underwrite the costs of her education. Her mother had suc-
cumbed to five-o’clock fever. Her father, Don Fernando, dressed in black with a stiff collar and a
gold watch chain, would give her a silver coin on Mondays for the household expenses, and the
funeral wreaths finished the week before would be taken away. He spent most of his time shut up in
his study and the few times that he went out he would return to recite the rosary with her. She had
intimate friendships with no one. She had never heard mention of the wars that were bleeding the
country. She continued her piano lessons at three in the afternoon. She had even began to lose the
illusion of being a queen when two peremptory raps of the knocker sounded at the door and she
opened it to a well-groomed military officer with ceremonious manners who had a scar on his cheek
and a gold medal on his chest. He closeted himself with her father in the study. Two hours later her
father came to get her in the sewing room. “Get your things together,” he told her. “You have to
take a long trip.” That was how they took her to Macondo. In one single day, with a brutal slap, life


threw on top of her the whole weight of a reality that her parents had kept hidden from her for
many years. When she returned home she shut herself up in her room to weep, indifferent to Don
Fernando’s pleas and explanations as he tried to erase the scars of that strange joke. She had sworn
to herself never to leave her bedroom until she died when Aureliano Segundo came to get her. It
was an act of impossible fate, because in the confusion of her indignation, in the fury of her shame,
she had lied to him so that he would never know her real identity. The only real clues that Aureliano
Segundo had when he left to look for her were her unmistakable highland accent and her trade as a
weaver of funeral wreaths. He searched for her without cease. With the fierce temerity with which
José Arcadio Buendía had crossed the mountains to found Macondo, with the blind pride with
which Colonel Aureliano Buendía had undertaken his fruitless wars, with the mad tenacity with
which Úrsula watched over the survival of the line, Aureliano Segundo looked for Fernanda, without
a single moment of respite. When he asked where they sold funeral wreaths they took him from
house to house so that he could choose the best ones. When he asked for the most beautiful woman
who had ever been seen on this earth, all the women brought him their daughters. He became lost in
misty byways, in times reserved for oblivion, in labyrinths of disappointment. He crossed a yellow
plain where the echo repeated one’s thoughts and where anxiety brought on premonitory mirages.
After sterile weeks he came to an unknown city where all the bells were tolling a dirge. Although he
had never seen them and no one had ever described them to him he immediately recognized the
walls eaten away by bone salt, the broken-down wooden balconies gutted by fungus, and nailed to
the outside door, almost erased by rain, the saddest cardboard sign in the world: Funeral Wreaths for
Sale. From that moment until the icy morning when Fernanda left her house under the care of the
Mother Superior there was barely enough time for the nuns to sew her trousseau and in six trunks
put the candelabra, the silver service, and the gold chamberpot along with the countless and useless
remains of a family catastrophe that had been two centuries late in its fulfillment. Don Fernando
declined the invitation to go along. He promised to go later when he had cleared up his affairs, and
from the moment when he gave his daughter his blessing he shut himself up in his study again to
write out the announcements with mournful sketches and the family coat of arms, which would be
the first human contact that Fernanda and her father would have had in all their lives. That was the
real date of her birth for her. For Aureliano Segundo it was almost simultaneously the beginning and
the end of happiness.

Fernanda carried a delicate calendar with small golden keys on which her spiritual adviser had
marked in purple ink the dates of venereal abstinence. Not counting Holy week, Sundays, holy days
of obligation, first Fridays, retreats, sacrifices, and cyclical impediments, her effective year was
reduced to forty-two days that were spread out through a web of purple crosses. Aureliano Segundo,
convinced that time would break up that hostile network, prolonged the wedding celebration be-
yond the expected time. Tired of throwing out so many empty brandy and champagne bottles so
that they would not clutter up the house and at the same time intrigued by the fact that the
newlyweds slept at different times and in separate rooms while the fireworks and music and the
slaughtering of cattle went on, Úrsula remembered her own experience and wondered whether Fer-
nanda might have a chastity belt too which would sooner or later provoke jokes in the town and give
rise to a tragedy. But Fernanda confessed to her that she was just letting two weeks go by before
allowing the first contact with her husband. Indeed, when the period was over, she opened her
bedroom with a resignation worthy of an expiatory victim and Aureliano Segundo saw the most
beautiful woman on earth, with her glorious eyes of a frightened animal and her long, copper-
colored hair spread out across the pillow. He was so fascinated with that vision that it took him a
moment to realize that Fernanda was wearing a white nightgown that reached down to her ankles,
with long sleeves and with a large, round buttonhole, delicately trimmed, at the level of her lower
stomach. Aureliano Segundo could not suppress an explosion of laughter.


“That’s the most obscene thing I’ve ever seen in my life,” he shouted with a laugh that rang
through the house. “I married a Sister of Charity.”

A month later, unsuccessful in getting his wife to take off her nightgown, he had the picture
taken of Petra Cotes dressed as a queen. Later on, when he succeeded in getting Fernanda to come
back home, she gave in to his urges in the fever of reconciliation, but she could not give him the
repose he had dreamed about when he went to fetch her in the city with the thirty-two belfries.
Aureliano Segundo found only a deep feeling of desolation in her. One night, a short time before
their first child was born, Fernanda realized that her husband had returned in secret to the bed of
Petra Cotes.

“That’s what happened,” he admitted. And he explained in a tone of prostrated resignation: “I
had to do it so that the animals would keep on breeding.”

He needed a little time to convince her about such a strange expedient, but when he finally did so
by means of proofs that seemed irrefutable, the only promise that Fernanda demanded from him
was that he should not be surprised by death in his concubine’s bed. In that way the three of them
continued living without bothering each other. Aureliano Segundo, punctual and loving with both of
them. Petra Cotes, strutting because of the reconciliation, and Fernanda, pretending that she did not
know the truth.

The pact did not succeed, however, in incorporating Fernanda into the family. Úrsula insisted in
vain that she take off the woolen ruff which she would have on when she got up from making love
and which made the neighbors whisper. She could not convince her to use the bathroom or the
night lavatory and sell the gold chamberpot to Colonel Aureliano Buendía so that he could convert
it into little fishes. Amaranta felt so uncomfortable with her defective diction and her habit of using
euphemisms to designate everything that she would always speak gibberish in front of her.

“Thifisif.” she would say, “ifisif onefos ofosif thofosif whosufu cantantant statantand thefesef
smufumellu ofosif therisir owfisown shifisifit.”

One day, irritated by the mockery, Fernanda wanted to know what Amaranta was saying, and she
did not use euphemisms in answering her.

“I was saying,” she told her, “that you’re one of those people who mix up their ass and their
ashes.”

From that time on they did not speak to each other again. When circumstances demanded it they
would send notes. In spite of the visible hostility of the family, Fernanda did not give up her drive to
impose the customs of her ancestors. She put an end to the custom of eating in the kitchen and
whenever anyone was hungry, and she imposed the obligation of doing it at regular hours at the
large table in the dining room, covered with a linen cloth and with silver candlesticks and table
service. The solemnity of an act which Úrsula had considered the most simple one of daily life
created a tense atmosphere against which the silent José Arcadio Segundo rebelled before anyone
else. But the custom was imposed, the same as that of reciting the rosary before dinner, and it drew
the attention of the neighbors, who soon spread the rumor that the Buendías did not sit down to the
table like other mortals but had changed the act of eating into a kind of high mass. Even Úrsula’s
superstitions, with origins that came more from an inspiration of the moment than from tradition,
came into conflict with those of Fernanda, who had inherited them from her parents and kept them
defined and catalogued for every occasion. As long as Úrsula had full use of her faculties some of
the old customs survived and the life of the family kept some quality of her impulsiveness, but when
she lost her sight and the weight of her years relegated her to a corner, the circle of rigidity begun by
Fernanda from the moment she arrived finally closed completely and no one but she determined the
destiny of the family. The business in pastries and small candy animals that Santa Sofía de la Piedad
had kept up because of Úrsula’s wishes was considered an unworthy activity by Fernanda and she
lost no time in putting a stop to it. The doors of the house, wide open from dawn until bedtime,


were closed during siesta time under the pretext that the sun heated up the bedrooms and in the end
they were closed for good. The aloe branch and loaf of bread that had been hanging over the door
since the days of the founding were replaced by a niche with the Sacred Heart of Jesus. Colonel
Aureliano, Buendía became aware somehow of those changes and foresaw their consequences.
“We’re becoming people of quality,” he protested. “At this rate we’ll end up fighting against the
Conservative regime again, but this time to install a king in its place.” Fernanda very tactfully tried
not to cross his path. Within herself she was bothered by his independent spirit his resistance to all
kinds of social rigidity. She was exasperated by his mugs of coffee at five in the morning, the
disorder of his workshop, his frayed blanket, and his custom of sitting in the street door at dusk. But
she had to tolerate that one loose piece in the family machinery because she was sure that the old
colonel was an animal who had been tamed by the years and by disappointment and who, in a burst
of senile rebellion, was quite capable of uprooting the foundations of the house. When her husband
decided to give their first son the name of his great-grandfather, she did not dare oppose him
because she had been there only a year. But when the first daughter was bom she expressed her
unreserved determination to name her Renata after her mother. Úrsula had decided to call her
Remedios. After a tense argument, in which Aureliano Segundo acted as the laughing go-between,
they baptized her with the name Renata Remedios, but Fernanda went on calling her just Renata
while her husband’s family and everyone in town called her Meme, a diminutive of Remedios.

At first Fernanda did not talk about her family, but in time she began to idealize her father. She
spoke of him at the table as an exceptional being who had renounced all forms of vanity and was on
his way to becoming a saint. Aureliano Segundo, startled at that unbridled glorification of his father-
in-law, could not resist the temptation to make small jokes behind his wife’s back. The rest of the
family followed his example. Even Úrsula, who was extremely careful to preserve family harmony
and who suffered in secret from the domestic friction, once allowed herself the liberty of saying that
her little great-great-grandson had his pontifical future assured because he was “the grandson of a
saint and the son of a queen and a rustler.” In spite of that conspiracy of smiles, the children became
accustomed to think of their grandfather as a legendary being who wrote them pious verses in his
letters and every Christmas sent them a box of gifts that barely fitted through the outside door.
Actually they were the last remains of his lordly inheritance. They used them to build an altar of life-
size saints in the children’s bedroom, saints with glass eyes that gave them a disquietingly lifelike
look, whose artistically embroidered clothing was better than that worn by any inhabitant of Macon-
do. Little by little the funereal splendor of the ancient and icy mansion was being transformed into
the splendor of the House of Buendía. “They’ve already sent us the whole family cemetery,”
Aureliano Segundo commented one day. “All we need now are the weeping willows and the
tombstones.” Although nothing ever arrived in the boxes that the children could play with, they
would spend all year waiting for December because, after all, the antique and always unpredictable
gifts were something, new in the house. On the tenth Christmas, when little José Arcadio was
getting ready to go to the seminary, the enormous box from their grandfather arrived earlier than
usual, nailed tight and protected with pitch, and addressed in the usual Gothic letters to the Very
Distinguished Lady Doña Fernanda del Carpio de Buendía. While she read the letter in her room the
children hastened to open the box. Aided as was customary by Aureliano Segundo, they broke the
seals, opened the cover, took out the protective sawdust, and found inside a long lead chest closed
by copper bolts. Aureliano Segundo took out the eight bolts as the children watched impatiently,
and he barely had time to give a cry and push the children aside when be raised the lead cover and
saw Don Fernando, dressed in black and with a crucifix on his chest, his skin broken out in
pestilential sores and cooking slowly in a frothy stew with bubbles like live pearls.

A short time after the birth of their daughter, the unexpected jubilee for Colonel Aureliano,
Buendía, ordered by the government to celebrate another anniversary of the Treaty of Neerlandia,


was announced. It was a decision so out of line with official policy that the colonel spoke out
violently against it and rejected the homage. “It’s the first time I’ve ever heard of the word ‘jubilee,’
” he said. “But whatever it means, it has to be a trick.” The small goldsmith shop was filled with
emissaries. Much older and more solemn, the lawyers in dark suits who in other days had flapped
about the colonel like crows had returned. When he saw them appear the same as the other time,
when they came to put a stop to the war, he could not bear the cynicism of their praise. He ordered
them to leave him in peace, insisting that he was not a hero of the nation as they said but an artisan
without memories whose only dream was to die of fatigue in the oblivion and misery of his little
gold fishes. What made him most indignant was the word that the president of the republic himself
planned to be present at the ceremonies in Macondo in order to decorate him with the Order of
Merit. Colonel Aureliano, Buendía had him told, word for word, that he was eagerly awaiting that
tardy but deserved occasion in order to take a shot at him, not as payment for the arbitrary acts and
anachronisms of his regime, but for his lack of respect for an old man who had not done anyone any
harm. Such was the vehemence with which he made the threat that the president of the republic
canceled his trip at the last moment and sent the decoration with a personal representative. Colonel
Gerineldo Márquez, besieged by pressures of all kinds, left his bed of a paralytic in order to persuade
his former companion in arms. When the latter saw the rocking chair carried by four men appear
and saw the friend who had shared his victories and defeats since youth sitting in it among some
large pillows, he did not have a single doubt but that he was making that effort in order to express
his solidarity. But when he discovered the real motive for his visit he had them take him out of the
workshop.

“Now I’m convinced too late,” he told him, “that I would have done you a great favor if I’d let
them shoot you.”

So the jubilee was celebrated without the attendance of any members of the family. Chance had it
that it also coincided with carnival week, but no one could get the stubborn idea out of Colonel
Aureliano Buendía’s head that the coincidence had been foreseen by the government in order to
heighten the cruelty of the mockery. From his lonely workshop he could hear the martial music, the
artillery salutes, the tolling of the Te Deum, and a few phrases of the speeches delivered in front of
the house as they named the street after him. His eyes grew moist with indignation, with angry
impotence, and for the first time since his defeat it pained him not to have the strength of youth so
that he could begin a bloody war that would wipe out the last vestiges of the Conservative regime.
The echoes of the homage had not died down when Úrsula knocked at the workshop door.

“Don’t bother me,” he said. “I’m busy.”

“Open up,” Úrsula insisted in a normal voice. “This has nothing to do with the celebration.”

Then Colonel Aureliano Buendía took down the bar and saw at the door seventeen men of the
most varied appearance, of all types and colors, but all with a solitary air that would have been
enough to identify them anywhere on earth. They were his sons. Without any previous agreement,
without knowing each other, they had arrived from the most distant corners of the coast, captivated
by the talk of the jubilee. They all bore with pride the name Aureliano and the last name of their
mothers. The three days that they stayed in the house, to the satisfaction of Úrsula and the scandal
of Fernanda, were like a state war. Amaranta searched among old papers for the ledger where Úrsula
had written down the names and birth and baptism dates of all of them, and beside the space for
each one she added his present address. That list could well have served as a recapitulation of twenty
years of war. From it the nocturnal itinerary of the colonel from the dawn he left Macondo at the
head of twenty-one men on his way to a fanciful rebellion until he returned for the last time
wrapped in a blanket stiff with blood could have been reconstructed. Aureliano Segundo did not let
the chance go by to regale his cousins with a thunderous champagne and accordion party that was
interpreted as a tardy adjustment of accounts with the carnival, which went awry because of the


jubilee. They smashed half of the dishes, they destroyed the rose bushes as they chased a bull they
were trying to hog-tie, they killed the hens by shooting them, they made Amaranta dance the sad
waltzes of Pietro Crespi, they got Remedios the Beauty to put on a pair of men’s pants and climb a
greased pole, and in the dining room they turned loose a pig daubed with lard, which prostrated
Fernanda, but no one regretted the destruction because the house shook with a healthy earthquake.
Colonel Aureliano Buendía who at first received them with mistrust and even doubted the parentage
of some, was amused by their wildness, and before they left he gave each one a little gold fish. Even
the withdrawn José Arcadio Segundo offered them an afternoon of cockfights, which was at the
point of ending in tragedy because several of the Aurelianos were so expert in matters of the cockpit
that they spotted Father Antonio Isabel’s tricks at once. Aureliano Segundo, who saw the limitless
prospect of wild times offered by those mad relatives, decided that they should all stay and work for
him. The only one who accepted was Aureliano Triste, a big mulatto with the drive and explorer’s
spirit of his grandfather. He had already tested his fortune in half the world and it did not matter to
him where he stayed. The others, even though they were unmarried, considered their destinies
established. They were all skillful craftsmen, the men of their houses, peace-loving people. The Ash
Wednesday before they went back to scatter out along the coast, Amaranta got them to put on
Sunday clothes and accompany her to church. More amused than devout, they let themselves be led
to the altar rail where Father Antonio Isabel made the sign of the cross in ashes on them. Back at
the house, when the youngest tried to clean his forehead, he discovered that the mark was indelible
and so were those of his brothers. They tried soap and water, earth and a scrubbing brush, and lastly
a pumice stone and lye, but they could not remove the crosses. On the other hand, Amaranta and
the others who had gone to mass took it off without any trouble. “It’s better that way,” Úrsula
stated as she said goodbye to them. “From now on everyone will know who you are.” They went off
in a troop, preceded by a band of musicians and shooting off fireworks, and they left behind in the
town an impression that the Buendía line had enough seed for many centuries. Aureliano Triste,
with the cross of ashes on his forehead, set up on the edge of town the ice factory that José Arcadio
Buendía had dreamed of in his inventive delirium.

Some months after his arrival, when he was already well-known and well-liked, Aureliano Triste
went about looking for a house so that he could send for his mother and an unmarried sister (who
was not the colonel’s daughter), and he became interested in the run-down big house that looked
abandoned on a corner of the square. He asked who owned it. Someone told him that it did not
belong to anyone, that in former times a solitary widow who fed on earth and whitewash from the
walls had lived there, and that in her last years she was seen only twice on the street with a hat of
tiny artificial flowers and shoes the color of old silver when she crossed the square to the post office
to mail a letter to the Bishop. They told him that her only companion was a pitiless servant woman
who killed dogs and cats and any animal that got into the house and threw their corpses into the
middle of the street in order to annoy people with the rotten stench. So much time had passed since
the sun had mummified the empty skin of the last animal that everybody took it for granted that the
lady of the house and the maid had died long before the wars were over, and that if the house was
still standing it was because in recent years there had not been a rough winter or destructive wind.
The hinges had crumbled with rust, the doors were held up only by clouds of cobwebs, the windows
were soldered shut by dampness, and the floor was broken by grass and wildflowers and in the
cracks lizards and all manner of vermin had their nests, all of which seemed to confirm the notion
that there had not been a human being there for at least half a century. The impulsive Aureliano
Triste did not need such proof to proceed. He pushed on the main door with his shoulder and the
worm-eaten wooden frame fell down noiselessly amid a dull cataclysm of dust and termite nests.
Aureliano Triste stood on the threshold waiting for the dust to clear and then he saw in the center of
the room the squalid woman, still dressed in clothing of the past century, with a few yellow threads


on her bald head, and with two large eyes, still beautiful, in which the last stars of hope had gone
out, and the skin of her face was wrinkled by the aridity of solitude. Shaken by that vision from
another world, Aureliano Triste barely noticed that the woman was aiming an antiquated pistol at
him.

“I beg your pardon,” he murmured.

She remained motionless in the center of the room filled with knickknacks, examining inch by
inch the giant with square shoulders and with a tattoo of ashes on his forehead, and through the
haze of dust she saw him in the haze of other times with a double-barreled shotgun on his shoulder
and a string of rabbits in his hand.

“For the love of God,” she said in a low voice, it’s not right for them to come to me with that
memory now.”

“I want to rent the house,” Aureliano Triste said.

The woman then raised the pistol, aiming with a firm wrist at the cross of ashes, and she held the
trigger with a determination against which there was no appeal.

“Get out,” she ordered.

That night at dinner Aureliano Triste told the family about the episode and Úrsula wept with
consternation. “Holy God!” she exclaimed, clutching her head with her hands. “She’s still alive!”
Time, wars, the countless everyday disasters had made her forget about Rebeca. The only one who
had not lost for a single minute the awareness that she was alive and rotting in her wormhole was
the implacable and aging Amaranta. She thought of her at dawn, when the ice of her heart awakened
her in her solitary bed, and she thought of her when she soaped her withered breasts and her lean
stomach, and when she put on the white stiff-starched petticoats and corsets of old age, and when
she changed the black bandage of terrible expiation on her hand. Always, at every moment, asleep
and awake, during the most sublime and most abject moments, Amaranta thought about Rebeca,
because solitude had made a selection in her memory and had burned the dimming piles of nostalgic
waste that life had accumulated in her heart, and had purified, magnified and eternalized the others,
the most bitter ones. Remedios the Beauty knew about Rebeca’s existence from her. Every time they
passed the run-down house she would tell her about an unpleasant incident, a tale of hate, trying in
that way to make her extended rancor be shared by her niece and consequently prolonged beyond
death, but her plan did not work because Remedios was immune to any kind of passionate feelings
and much less to those of others. Úrsula, on the other hand, who had suffered through a process
opposite to Amaranta’s, recalled Rebeca with a memory free of impurities, for the image of the
pitiful child brought to the house with the bag containing her parents’ bones prevailed over the
offense that had made her unworthy to be connected to the family tree any longer. Aureliano
Segundo decided that they would have to bring her to the house and take care of her, but his good
intentions were frustrated by the firm intransigence of Rebeca, who had needed many years of
suffering and misery in order to attain the privileges of solitude and who was not disposed to
renounce them in exchange for an old age disturbed by the false attractions of charity.

In February, when the sixteen sons of Colonel Aureliano Buendía returned, still marked with the
cross of ashes, Aureliano Triste spoke to them about Rebeca in the tumult of the celebration and in
half a day they restored the appearance of the house, changing doors and windows, painting the
front with gay colors, bracing walls and pouring fresh cement on the floor, but they could not get
any authorization to continue the work inside. Rebeca did not even come to the door. She let them
finish the mad restoration, then calculated what it had cost and sent Argénida, her old servant who
was still with her, to them with a handful of coins that had been withdrawn from circulation after
the last war and that Rebeca thought were still worth something it was then that they saw to what a
fantastic point her separation from the world had arrived and they understood that it would be
impossible to rescue her from her stubborn enclosure while she still had a breath of life in her.


On the second visit by the sons of Colonel Aureliano Buendía to Macondo, another of them,
Aureliano Centeno, stayed on to work with Aureliano Triste. He was one of the first who had been
brought to the house for baptism and Úrsula and Amaranta remembered him very well because in a
few hours he had destroyed every breakable object that passed through his hands. Time had
moderated his early impulse for growth and he was a man of average height marked by smallpox
scars, but his amazing power for manual destruction remained intact. He broke so many plates, even
without touching them, that Fernanda decided to buy him a set of pewterware before he did away
with the last pieces of her expensive china, and even the resistant metal plates were soon dented and
twisted. But to make up for that irremediable power, which was exasperating even for him, he had a
cordiality that won the immediate confidence of others and a stupendous capacity for work. In a
short time he had increased the production of ice to such a degree that it was too much for the local
market and Aureliano Triste had to think about the possibility of expanding the business to other
towns in the swamp. It was then that he thought of the decisive step, not only for the modernization
of his business but to link the town with the rest of the world.

“We have to bring in the railroad,” he said.

That was the first time that the word had ever been heard in Macondo. Looking at the sketch
that Aureliano Triste drew on the table and that was a direct descendent of the plans with which
José Arcadio Buendía had illustrated his project for solar warfare, Úrsula confirmed her impression
that time was going in a circle. But unlike his forebear, Aureliano Triste did not lose any sleep or
appetite nor did he torment anyone with crises of ill humor, but he considered the most harebrained
of projects as immediate possibilities, made rational calculations about costs and dates, and brought
them off without any intermediate exasperation. If Aureliano Segundo had something of his great-
grandfather in him and lacked something of Colonel Aureliano Buendía, it was an absolute
indifference to mockery, and he gave the money to bring the railroad with the same lighthearted air
with which he had given it for his brother’s absurd navigation project. Aureliano Triste consulted
the calendar and left the following Wednesday, planning to return after the rains had passed. There
was no more news of him. Aureliano Centeno, overwhelmed by the abundance of the factory, had
already begun to experiment with the production of ice with a base of fruit juices instead of water,
and without knowing it or thinking about it, he conceived the essential fundamentals for the
invention of sherbet. In that way he planned to diversify the production of an enterprise he
considered his own, because his brother showed no signs of returning after the rains had passed and
a whole summer had gone by with no news of him. At the start of another winter, however, a
woman who was washing clothes in the river during the hottest time of the day ran screaming down
the main street in an alarming state of commotion.

“It’s coming,” she finally explained. “Something frightful, like a kitchen dragging a village behind
it.”

At that moment the town was shaken by a whistle with a fearful echo and a loud, panting
respiration. During the previous weeks they had seen the gangs who were laying ties and tracks and
no one paid attention to them because they thought it was some new trick of the gypsies, coming
back with whistles and tambourines and their age-old and discredited song and dance about the
qualities of some concoction put together by journeyman geniuses of Jerusalem. But when they
recovered from the noise of the whistles and the snorting, all the inhabitants ran out into the street
and saw Aureliano Triste waving from the locomotive, and in a trance they saw the flower-bedecked
train which was arriving for the first time eight months late. The innocent yellow train that was to
bring so many ambiguities and certainties, so many pleasant and unpleasant moments, so many
changes, calamities, and feelings of nostalgia to Macondo.


Chapter 12

DAZZLED BY SO MANY and such marvelous inventions, the people of Macondo did not know where
their amazement began. They stayed up all night looking at the pale electric bulbs fed by the plant
that Aureliano Triste had brought back when the train made its second trip, and it took time and
effort for them to grow accustomed to its obsessive toom-toom. They be. came indignant over the
living images that the prosperous merchant Bruno Crespi projected in the theater with the lion-head
ticket windows, for the character who had died and was buried in one film and for whose
misfortune tears of affliction had been shed would reappear alive and transformed into an Arab in
the next one. The audience, who paid two cents apiece to share the difficulties of the actors, would
not tolerate that outlandish fraud and they broke up the seats. The mayor, at the urging of Bruno
Crespi, explained in a proclamation that the cinema was a machine of illusions that did not merit the
emotional outbursts of the audience. With that discouraging explanation many felt that they had
been the victims of some new and showy gypsy business and they decided not to return to the
movies, considering that they already had too many troubles of their own to weep over the acted-out
misfortunes of imaginary beings. Something similar happened with the cylinder phonographs that
the merry matrons from France brought with them as a substitute for the antiquated hand organs
and that for a time had serious effects on the livelihood of the band of musicians. At first curiosity
increased the clientele on the forbidden street and there was even word of respectable ladies who
disguised themselves as workers in order to observe the novelty of the phonograph from first hand,
but from so much and such close observation they soon reached the conclusion that it was not an
enchanted mill as everyone had thought and as the matrons had said, but a mechanical trick that
could not be compared with something so moving, so human, and so full of everyday truth as a
band of musicians. It was such a serious disappointment that when phonographs became so popular
that there was one in every house they were not considered objects for amusement for adults but as
something good for children to take apart. On the other hand, when someone from the town had
the opportunity to test the crude reality of the telephone installed in the railroad station, which was
thought to be a rudimentary version of the phonograph because of its crank, even the most
incredulous were upset. It was as if God had decided to put to the test every capacity for surprise
and was keeping the inhabitants of Macondo in a permanent alternation between excitement and
disappointment, doubt and revelation, to such an extreme that no one knew for certain where the
limits of reality lay. It was an intricate stew of truths and mirages that convulsed the ghost of José
Arcadio Buendía under the chestnut tree with impatience and made him wander all through the
house even in broad daylight. Ever since the railroad had been officially inaugurated and had begun
to arrive with regularity on Wednesdays at eleven o’clock and the primitive wooden station with a
desk, a telephone, and a ticket window had been built, on the streets of Macondo men and women
were seen who had adopted everyday and normal customs and manners but who really looked like
people out of a circus. In a town that had chafed under the tricks of the gypsies there was no future
for those ambulatory acrobats of commerce who with equal effrontery offered a whistling kettle and
a daily regime that would assure the salvation of the soul on the seventh day; but from those who let
themselves be convinced out of fatigue and the ones who were always unwary, they reaped
stupendous benefits. Among those theatrical creatures, wearing riding breeches and leggings, a pith
helmet and steel-rimmed glasses, with topaz eyes and the skin of a thin rooster, there arrived in
Macondo on one of so many Wednesdays the chubby and smiling Mr. Herbert, who ate at the
house.


No one had noticed him at the table until the first bunch of bananas had been eaten. Aureliano
Segundo had come across him by chance as he protested In broken Spanish because there were no
rooms at the Hotel Jacob, and as he frequently did with strangers, he took him home. He was in the
captive-balloon business, which had taken him halfway around the world with excellent profits, but
he had not succeeded in taking anyone up in Macondo because they considered that invention
backward after having seen and tried the gypsies’ flying carpets. He was leaving, therefore, on the
next train. When they brought to the table the tiger-striped bunch of bananas that they were
accustomed to hang in the dining room during lunch, he picked the first piece of fruit without great
enthusiasm. But he kept on eating as he spoke, tasting, chewing, more with the distraction of a wise
man than with the delight of a good eater, and when he finished the first bunch he asked them to
bring him another. Then he took a small case with optical instruments out of the toolbox that he
always carried with him. With the auspicious attention of a diamond merchant he examined the
banana meticulously, dissecting it with a special scalpel, weighing the pieces on a pharmacist’s scale,
and calculating its breadth with a gunsmith’s calipers. Then he took a series of instruments out of
the chest with which he measured the temperature, the level of humidity in the atmosphere, and the
intensity of the light. It was such an intriguing ceremony that no one could eat in peace as everybody
waited for Mr. Herbert to pass a final and revealing judgment, but he did not say anything that
allowed anyone to guess his intentions.

On the days that followed he was seen with a net and a small basket hunting butterflies on the
outskirts of town. On Wednesday a group of engineers, agronomists, hydrologists, topographers,
and surveyors arrived who for several weeks explored the places where Mr. Herbert had hunted his
butterflies. Later on Mr. Jack Brown arrived in an extra coach that had been coupled onto the yellow
train and that was silver-plated all over, with seats of episcopal velvet, and a roof of blue glass. Also
arriving on the special car, fluttering around Mr. Brown, were the solemn lawyers dressed in black
who in different times had followed Colonel Aureliano Buendía everywhere, and that led the people
to think that the agronomists, hydrologists, topographers, and surveyors, like Mr. Herbert with his
captive balloons and his colored butterflies and Mr. Brown with his mausoleum on wheels and his
ferocious German shepherd dogs, had something to do with the war. There was not much time to
think about it, however, because the suspicious inhabitants of Macondo barely began to wonder
what the devil was going on when the town had already become transformed into an encampment
of wooden houses with zinc roofs inhabited by foreigners who arrived on the train from halfway
around the world, riding not only on the seats and platforms but even on the roof of the coaches.
The gringos, who later on brought their languid wives in muslin dresses and large veiled hats, built a
separate town across the railroad tracks with streets lined with palm trees, houses with screened win-
dows, small white tables on the terraces, and fans mounted on the ceilings, and extensive blue lawns
with peacocks and quails. The section was surrounded by a metal fence topped with a band of
electrified chicken wire which during the cool summer mornings would be black with roasted
swallows. No one knew yet what they were after, or whether they were actually nothing but
philanthropists, and they had already caused a colossal disturbance, much more than that of the old
gypsies, but less transitory and understandable. Endowed with means that had been reserved for
Divine Providence in former times, they changed the pattern of the rams, accelerated the cycle of
harvest, and moved the river from where it had always been and put it with its white stones and icy
currents on the other side of the town, behind the cemetery. It was at that time that they built a
fortress of reinforced concrete over the faded tomb of José Arcadio, so that the corpses smell of
powder would not contaminate the waters. For the foreigners who arrived without love they
converted the street of the loving matrons from France into a more extensive village than it had
been, and on one glorious Wednesday they brought in a trainload of strange whores, Babylonish
women skilled in age-old methods and in possession of all manner of unguents and devices to


stimulate the unaroused, to give courage to the timid, to satiate the voracious, to exalt the modest
man, to teach a lesson to repeaters, and to correct solitary people. The Street of the Turks, enriched
by well-lit stores with products from abroad, displacing the old bazaars with their bright colors,
overflowed on Saturday nights with the crowds of adventurers who bumped into each other among
gambling tables, shooting galleries, the alley where the future was guessed and dreams interpreted,
and tables of fried food and drinks, and on Sunday mornings there were scattered on the ground
bodies that were sometimes those of happy drunkards and more often those of onlookers felled by
shots, fists, knives, and bottles during the brawls. It was such a tumultuous and intemperate invasion
that during the first days it was impossible to walk through the streets because of the furniture and
trunks, and the noise of the carpentry of those who were building their houses in any vacant lot
without asking anyone’s permission, and the scandalous behavior of couples who hung their
hammocks between the almond trees and made love under the netting in broad daylight and in view
of everyone. The only serene corner had been established by peaceful West Indian Negroes, who
built a marginal street with wooden houses on piles where they would sit in the doors at dusk
singing melancholy hymns in their disordered gabble. So many changes took place in such a short
time that eight months after Mr. Herbert’s visit the old inhabitants had a hard time recognizing their
own town.

“Look at the mess we’ve got ourselves into,” Colonel Aureliano Buendía said at that time, “just
because we invited a gringo to eat some bananas.”

Aureliano Segundo, on the other hand, could not contain his happiness over the avalanche of
foreigners. The house was suddenly filled with unknown guests, with invincible and worldly
carousers, and it became necessary to add bedrooms off the courtyard, widen the dining room, and
exchange the old table for one that held sixteen people, with new china and silver, and even then
they had to eat lunch in shifts. Fernanda had to swallow her scruples and their guests of the worst
sort like kings as they muddied the porch with their boots, urinated in the garden. laid their mats
down anywhere to take their siesta, and spoke without regard for the sensitivities of ladies or the
proper behavior of gentlemen. Amaranta, was so scandalized with the plebeian invasion that she
went back to eating in the kitchen as in olden days. Colonel Aureliano Buendía, convinced that the
majority of those who came into his workshop to greet him were not doing it because of sympathy
or regard but out of the curiosity to meet a historical relic, a museum fossil, decided to shut himself
in by barring the door and he was not seen any more except on very rare occasions when he would
sit at the street door. Úrsula, on the other hand, even during the days when she was already dragging
her feet and walking about groping along the walls, felt a juvenile excitement as the time for the
arrival of the train approached. “We have to prepare some meat and fish,” she would order the four
cooks, who hastened to have everything ready under the imperturbable direction of Santa Sofía de la
Piedad. “We have to prepare everything,” she insisted, “because we never know what these strangers
like to eat.” The train arrived during the hottest time of day. At lunchtime the house shook with the
bustle of a marketplace, and the perspiring guests—who did not even know who their hosts were—
trooped in to occupy the best places at the table, while the cooks bumped into each other with
enormous kettles of soup, pots of meat, large gourds filled with vegetables, and troughs of rice, and
passed around the contents of barrels of lemonade with inexhaustible ladles. The disorder was such
that Fernanda was troubled by the idea that many were eating twice and on more than one occasion
she was about to burst out with a vegetable hawker’s insults because someone at the table in
confusion asked her for the check. More than a year had gone by since Mr. Herbert’s visit and the
only thing that was known was that the gringos were planning to plant banana trees in the enchanted
region that José Arcadio Buendía and his men had crossed in search of the route to the great
inventions. Two other sons of Colonel Aureliano Buendía, with the cross of ashes on their


foreheads, arrived, drawn by that great volcanic belch, and they justified their determination with a
phrase that may have explained everybody’s reasons.

“We came,” they said, “because everyone is coming.”

Remedios the Beauty was the only one who was immune to the banana plague. She was becalmed
in a magnificent adolescence, more and more impenetrable to formality, more and more indifferent
to malice and suspicion, happy in her own world of simple realities. She did not understand why
women complicated their lives with corsets and petticoats, so she sewed herself a coarse cassock that
she simply put over her and without further difficulties resolved the problem of dress, without
taking away the feeling of being naked, which according to her lights was the only decent way to be
when at home. They bothered her so much to cut the rain of hair that already reached to her thighs
and to make rolls with combs and braids with red ribbons that she simply shaved her head and used
the hair to make wigs for the saints. The startling thing about her simplifying instinct was that the
more she did away with fashion in a search for comfort and the more she passed over conventions
as she obeyed spontaneity, the more disturbing her incredible beauty became and the more
provocative she became to men. When the sons of Colonel Aureliano Buendía were in Macondo for
the first time, Úrsula remembered that in their veins they bore the same blood as her great-
granddaughter and she shuddered with a forgotten fright. “Keep your eyes wide open,” she warned
her. “With any of them your children will come out with the tail of a pig.” The girl paid such little
attention to the warning that she dressed up as a man and rolled around in the sand in order to
climb the greased pole, and she was at the point of bringing on a tragedy among the seventeen
cousins, who were driven mad by the unbearable spectacle. That was why none of them slept at the
house when they visited the town and the four who had stayed lived in rented rooms at Úrsula’s
insistence. Remedios the Beauty, however, would have died laughing if she had known about that
precaution. Until her last moment on earth she was unaware that her irreparable fate as a disturbing
woman was a daily disaster. Every time she appeared in the dining room, against Úrsula’s orders, she
caused a panic of exasperation among the outsiders. It was all too evident that she was completely
naked underneath her crude nightshirt and no one could understand that her shaved and perfect
skull was not some kind of challenge, and that the boldness with which she uncovered her thighs to
cool off was not a criminal provocation, nor was her pleasure when she sucked her fingers after.
eating. What no member of the family ever knew was that the strangers did not take long to realize
that Remedios the Beauty gave off a breath of perturbation, a tormenting breeze that was still
perceptible several hours after she had passed by. Men expert in the disturbances of love,
experienced all over the world, stated that they had never suffered an anxiety similar to the one
produced by the natural smell of Remedios the Beauty. On the porch with the begonias, in the
parlor, in any place in the house, it was possible to point out the exact place where she had been and
the time that had passed since she had left it. It was a definite, unmistakable trace that no one in the
family could distinguish because it had been incorporated into the daily odors for a long time, but it
was one that the outsiders identified immediately. They were the only ones, therefore, who
understood how the young commander of the guard had died of love and how a gentleman from a
faraway land had been plunged into desperation. Unaware of the restless circle in which she moved,
of the unbearable state of intimate calamity that she provoked as she passed by, Remedios the
Beauty treated the men without the least bit of malice and in the end upset them with her innocent
complaisance. When Úrsula succeeded in imposing the command that she eat with Amaranta in the
kitchen so that the outsiders would not see her, she felt more comfortable, because, after all, she was
beyond all discipline. In reality, it made no difference to her where she ate, and not at regular hours
but according to the whims of her appetite. Sometimes she would get up to have lunch at three in
the morning, sleep all day long, and she spent several months with her timetable all in disarray until
some casual incident would bring her back into the order of things. When things were going better


she would get up at eleven o’clock in the morning and shut herself up until two o’clock, completely
nude, in the bathroom, killing scorpions as she came out of her dense and prolonged sleep. Then
she would throw water from the cistern over herself with a gourd. It was an act so prolonged, so
meticulous, so rich in ceremonial aspects that one who did not know her well would have thought
that she was given over to the deserved adoration of her own body. For her, however, that solitary
rite lacked all sensuality and was simply a way of passing the time until she was hungry. One day, as
she began to bathe herself, a stranger lifted a tile from the roof and was breathless at the tremendous
spectacle of her nudity. She saw his desolate eyes through the broken tiles and had no reaction of
shame but rather one of alarm.

“Be careful,” she exclaimed. “You’ll fall.”

“I just wanted to see you,” the foreigner murmured.

“Oh, all right,” she said. “But be careful, those tiles are rotten.”

The stranger’s face had a pained expression of stupor and he seemed to be battling silently
against his primary instincts so as not to break up the mirage. Remedios the Beauty thought that he
was suffering from the fear that the tiles would break and she bathed herself more quickly than usual
so that the man would not be in danger. While she was pouring water from the, cistern she told him
that the roof was in that state because she thought that the bed of leaves had been rotted by the rain
and that was what was filling the bathroom with scorpions. The stranger thought that her small talk
was a way of covering her complaisance, so that when she began to soap herself he gave into
temptation and went a step further.

“Let me soap you,” he murmured.

“Thank you for your good intentions,” she said, “but my two hands are quite enough.”

“Even if it’s just your back,” the foreigner begged.

“That would be silly,” she said. “People never soap their backs.”

Then, while she was drying herself, the stranger begged her, with his eyes full of tears, to marry
him. She answered him sincerely that she would never marry a man who was so simple that he had
wasted almost an hour and even went without lunch just to see a woman taking a bath. Finally, when
she put on her cassock, the man could not bear the proof that, indeed, she was not wearing anything
underneath, as everyone had suspected, and he felt himself marked forever with the white-hot iron
of that secret. Then he took two more tiles off in order to drop down into the bathroom.

“It’s very high,” she warned him in fright. “You’ll kill yourself!”

The rotten tiles broke with a noise of disaster and the man barely had time to let out a cry of
terror as he cracked his skull and was killed outright on the cement floor. The foreigners who heard
the noise in the dining room and hastened to remove the body noticed the suffocating odor of
Remedios the Beauty on his skin. It was so deep in his body that the cracks in his skull did not give
off blood but an amber-colored oil that was impregnated with that secret perfume, and then they
understood that the smell of Remedios the Beauty kept on torturing men beyond death, right down
to the dust of their bones. Nevertheless, they did not relate that horrible accident to the other two
men who had died because of Remedios the Beauty. A victim was still needed before the outsiders
and many of the old inhabitants of Macondo would credit the legend that Remedios Buendía did not
give off a breath of love but a fatal emanation. The occasion for the proof of it came some months
later on one afternoon when Remedios the Beauty went with a group of girl friends to look at the
new plantings. For the girls of Macondo that novel game was reason for laughter and surprises,
frights and jokes, and at night they would talk about their walk as if it had been an experience in a
dream. Such was the prestige of that silence that Úrsula did not have the heart to take the fun away
from Remedios the Beauty, and she let her go one afternoon, providing that she wore a hat and a
decent dress. As soon as the group of friends went into the plantings the air became impregnated
with a fatal fragrance. The men who were working along the rows felt possessed by a strange


fascination, menaced by some invisible danger, and many succumbed to a terrible desire to weep.
Remedios the Beauty and her startled friends managed to take refuge in a nearby house just as they
were about to be assaulted by a pack of ferocious males. A short time later they were rescued by the
flour Aurelianos, whose crosses of ash inspired a sacred respect, as if they were caste marks, stamps
of invulnerability. Remedios the Beauty did not tell anyone that one of the men, taking advantage of
the tumult, had managed to attack her stomach with a hand that was more like the claw of an eagle
clinging to the edge of a precipice. She faced the attacker in a kind of instantaneous flash and saw
the disconsolate eyes, which remained stamped on her heart like the hot coals of pity. That night the
man boasted of his audacity and swaggered over his good luck on the Street of the Turks a few
minutes before the kick of a horse crushed his chest and a crowd of outsiders saw him die in the
middle of the street, drowned in his own bloody vomiting.

The supposition that Remedios the Beauty Possessed powers of death was then borne out by
four irrefutable events. Although some men who were easy with their words said that it was worth
sacrificing one’s life for a night of love with such an arousing woman, the truth was that no one
made any effort to do so. Perhaps, not only to attain her but also to conjure away her dangers, all
that was needed was a feeling as primitive and as simple as that of love, but that was the only thing
that did not occur to anyone. Úrsula did not worry about her any more. On another occasion, when
she had not yet given up the idea of saving her for the world, she had tried to get her interested in
basic domestic affairs. “Men demand much more than you think,” she would tell her enigmatically.
“There’s a lot of cooking, a lot of sweeping, a lot of suffering over little things beyond what you
think.” She was deceiving herself within, trying to train her for domestic happiness because she was
convinced that once his passion was satisfied them would not be a man on the face of the earth
capable of tolerating even for a day a negligence that was beyond all understanding. The birth of the
latest José Arcadio and her unshakable will to bring him up to be Pope finally caused her to cease
worrying about her great-granddaughter. She abandoned her to her fate, trusting that sooner or later
a miracle would take place and that in this world of everything there would also be a man with
enough sloth to put up with her. For a long time already Amaranta had given up trying to make her
into a useful woman. Since those forgotten afternoons when her niece barely had enough interest to
turn the crank on the sewing machine, she had reached the conclusion that she was simpleminded.
“Were going to have to raffle you off,” she would tell her, perplexed at the fact that men’s words
would not penetrate her. Later on, when Úrsula insisted that Remedios the Beauty go to mass with
her face covered with a shawl, Amaranta thought that a mysterious recourse like that would turn out
to be so provoking that soon a man would come who would be intrigued enough to search out
patiently for the weak point of her heart. But when she saw the stupid way in which she rejected a
pretender who for many reasons was more desirable than a prince, she gave up all hope. Fernanda
did not even make any attempt to understand her. When she saw Remedios the Beauty dressed as a
queen at the bloody carnival she thought that she was an extraordinary creature. But when she saw
her eating with her hands, incapable of giving an answer that was not a miracle of simplemind-
edness, the only thing that she lamented was the fact that the idiots in the family lived so long. In
spite of the fact that Colonel Aureliano Buendía kept on believing and repeating that Remedios the
Beauty was in reality the most lucid being that he had ever known and that she showed it at every
moment with her startling ability to put things over on everyone, they let her go her own way.
Remedios the Beauty stayed there wandering through the desert of solitude, bearing no cross on her
back, maturing in her dreams without nightmares, her interminable baths, her unscheduled meals,
her deep and prolonged silences that had no memory until one afternoon in March, when Fernanda
wanted to fold her brabant sheets in the garden and asked the women in the house for help. She had
just begun when Amaranta noticed that Remedios the Beauty was covered all over by an intense
paleness.


“Don’t you feel well?” she asked her.

Remedios the Beauty, who was clutching the sheet by the other end, gave a pitying smile.

“Quite the opposite,” she said, “I never felt better.”

She had just finished saying it when Fernanda felt a delicate wind of light pull the sheets out of
her hands and open them up wide. Amaranta felt a mysterious trembling in the lace on her
petticoats and she tried to grasp the sheet so that she would not fall down at the instant in which
Remedios the Beauty began to rise. Úrsula, almost blind at the time, was the only person who was
sufficiently calm to identify the nature of that determined wind and she left the sheets to the mercy
of the light as she watched Remedios the Beauty waving good-bye in the midst of the flapping
sheets that rose up with her, abandoning with her the environment of beetles and dahlias and
passing through the air with her as four o’clock in the afternoon came to an end, and they were lost
forever with her in the upper atmosphere where not even the highest-flying birds of memory could
reach her.

The outsiders, of course, thought that Remedios the Beauty had finally succumbed to her
irrevocable fate of a queen bee and that her family was trying to save her honor with that tale of
levitation. Fernanda, burning with envy, finally accepted the miracle, and for a long time she kept on
praying to God to send her back her sheets. Most people believed in the miracle and they even
lighted candles and celebrated novenas. Perhaps there might have been talk of nothing else for a
long time if the barbarous extermination of the Aurelianos had not replaced amazement with honor.
Although he had never thought of it as an omen, Colonel Aureliano Buendía had foreseen the tragic
end of his sons in a certain way. When Aureliano Serrador and Aureliano Arcaya, the two who
arrived during the tumult, expressed a wish to stay in Macondo, their father tried to dissuade them.
He could not understand what they were going to do in a town that had been transformed into a
dangerous place overnight. But Aureliano Centeno and Aureliano Triste, backed by Aureliano
Segundo. gave them work in their businesses. Colonel Aureliano Buendía had reasons that were still
very confused and were against that determination. When he saw Mr. Brown in the first automobile
to reach Macondo—an orange convertible with a horn that frightened dogs with its bark—the old
soldier grew indignant with the servile excitement of the people and he realized that something had
changed in the makeup of the men since the days when they would leave their wives and children
and toss a shotgun on their shoulders to go off to war. The local authorities, after the armistice of
Neerlandia, were mayors without initiative, decorative judges picked from among the peaceful and
tired Conservatives of Macondo. “This is a regime of wretches,” Colonel Aureliano Buendía would
comment when he saw the barefoot policemen armed with wooden clubs pass. “We fought all those
wars and all of it just so that we didn’t have to paint our houses blue.” When the banana company
arrived, however, the local functionaries were replaced by dictatorial foreigners whom Mr. Brown
brought to live in the electrified chicken yard so that they could enjoy, as he explained it, the dignity
that their status warranted and so that they would not suffer from the heat and the mosquitoes and
the countless discomforts and privations of the town. The old policemen were replaced by hired
assassins with machetes. Shut up in his workshop, Colonel Aureliano Buendía thought about those
changes and for the first time in his quiet years of solitude he was tormented by the definite certainty
that it had been a mistake not to have continued the war to its final conclusion. During that time a
brother of the forgotten Colonel Magnífico Visbal was taking his seven-year-old grandson to get a
soft drink at one of the pushcarts on the square and because the child accidentally bumped into a
corporal of police and spilled the drink on his uniform, the barbarian cut him to pieces with his
machete, and with one stroke he cut off the head of the grandfather as he tried to stop him. The
whole town saw the decapitated man pass by as a group of men carried him to his house, with a
woman dragging the head along by its hair, and the bloody sack with the pieces of the child.


For Colonel Aureliano Buendía it meant the limits of atonement. He suddenly found himself
suffering from the same indignation that he had felt in his youth over the body of the woman who
had been beaten to death because she had been bitten by a rabid dog. He looked at the groups of
bystanders in front of the house and with his old stentorian voice, restored by a deep disgust with
himself, he unloaded upon them the burden of hate that he could no longer bear in his heart.

“One of these days,” he shouted, I’m going to arm my boys so we can get rid of these shitty
gringos!”

During the course of that week, at different places along the coast, his seventeen sons were
hunted down like rabbits by invisible criminals who aimed at the center of their crosses of ash.
Aureliano Triste was leaving the house with his mother at seven in the evening when a rifle shot
came out of the darkness and perforated his forehead. Aureliano Centeno was found in the
hammock that he was accustomed to hang up in the factory with an icepick between his eyebrows
driven in up to the handle. Aureliano Serrador had left his girl friend at her parents’ house after
having taken her to the movies and was returning through the well-lighted Street of the Turks when
someone in the crowd who was never identified fired a revolver shot which knocked him over into a
caldron of boiling lard. A few minutes later someone knocked at the door of the room where
Aureliano Arcaya was shut up with a woman and shouted to him: “Hurry up, they’re killing your
brothers.” The woman who was with him said later that Aureliano Arcaya jumped out of bed and
opened the door and was greeted with the discharge of a Mauser that split his head open. On that
night of death, while the house was preparing to hold a wake for the four corpses, Fernanda ran
through the town like a madwoman looking for Aureliano Segundo, whom Petra Cotes had locked
up in a closet, thinking that the order of extermination included all who bore the colonel’s name.
She would not let him out until the fourth day, when the telegrams received from different places
along the coast made it clear that the fury of the invisible enemy was directed only at the brothers
marked with the crosses of ash. Amaranta fetched the ledger where she had written down the facts
about her nephews and as the telegrams arrived she drew lines through the names until only that of
the eldest remained. They remembered him very well because of the contrast between his dark skin
and his green eyes. His name was Aureliano Amador and he was a carpenter, living in a village
hidden in the foothills. After waiting two weeks for the telegram telling of his death, Aureliano
Segundo sent a messenger to him in order to warn him, thinking that he might not know about the
threat that hung over him. The emissary returned with the news that Aureliano Amador was safe.
The night of the extermination two men had gone to get him at his house and had shot at him with
their revolvers but they had missed the cross of ashes. Aureliano Amador had been able to leap over
the wall of the courtyard and was lost in the labyrinth of the mountains, which he knew like the back
of his hand thanks to the friendship he maintained with the Indians, from whom he bought wood.
Nothing more was heard of him.

Those were dark days for Colonel Aureliano Buendía. The president of the republic sent him a
telegram of condolence in which he promised an exhaustive investigation and paid homage to the
dead men. At his command, the mayor appeared at the services with four funeral wreaths, which he
tried to place on the coffins, but the colonel ordered him into the street. After the burial he drew up
and personally submitted to the president of the republic a violent telegram, which the telegrapher
refused to send. Then he enriched it with terms of singular aggressiveness, put it in an envelope, and
mailed it. As had happened with the death of his wife, as had happened to him so many times during
the war with the deaths of his best friends, he did not have a feeling of sorrow but a blind and
directionless rage, a broad feeling of impotence. He even accused Father Antonio Isabel of
complicity for having marked his sons with indelible ashes so that they-could be identified by their
enemies. The decrepit priest, who could no longer string ideas together and who was beginning to
startle his parishioners with the wild interpretations he gave from the pulpit, appeared one afternoon


at the house with the goblet in which he had prepared the ashes that Wednesday and he tried to
anoint the whole family with them to show that they could be washed off with water. But the horror
of the misfortune had penetrated so deeply that not even Fernanda would let him experiment on her
and never again was a Buendía seen to kneel at the altar rail on Ash Wednesday.

Colonel Aureliano Buendía did not recover his calm for a long time. He abandoned the
manufacture of little fishes, ate with great difficulty, and wandered all through the house as if
walking in his sleep, dragging his blanket and chewing on his quiet rage. At the end of three months
his hair was ashen, his old waxed mustache poured down beside his colorless lips, but, on the other
hand, his eyes were once more the burning coals that had startled those who had seen him born and
that in other days had made chairs rock with a simple glance. In the fury of his torment he tried
futilely to rouse the omens that had guided his youth along dangerous paths into the desolate
wasteland of glory. He was lost, astray in a strange house where nothing and no one now stirred in
him the slightest vestige of affection. Once he opened Melquíades’ room, looking for the traces of a
past from before the war, and he found only rubble, trash, piles of waste accumulated over all the
years of abandonment. Between the covers of the books that no one had ever read again, in the old
parchments damaged by dampness, a livid flower had prospered, and in the air that had been the
purest and brightest in the house an unbearable smell of rotten memories floated. One morning he
found Úrsula weeping under the chestnut tree at the knees of her dead husband. Colonel Aureliano
Buendía was the only inhabitant of the house who still did not see the powerful old man who had
been beaten down by half a century in the open air. “Say hello to your father,” Úrsula told him. He
stopped for an instant in front of the chestnut tree and once again he saw that the empty space
before him did not arouse an affection either.

“What does he say?” he asked.

“He’s very sad,” Úrsula answered, “because he thinks that you’re going to die.”

“Tell him,” the colonel said, smiling, “that a person doesn’t die when he should but when he
can.”

The omen of the, dead father stirred up the last remnant of pride that was left in his heart, but he
confused it with a sudden gust of strength. It was for that reason that he hounded Úrsula to tell him
where in the courtyard the gold coins that they had found inside the plaster Saint Joseph were
buried. “You’ll never know,” she told him with a firmness inspired by an old lesson. “One day,” she
added, “the owner of that fortune will appear and only he can dig it up.” No one knew why a man
who had always been so generous had begun to covet money with such anxiety, and not the modest
amounts that would have been enough to resolve an emergency, but a fortune of such mad size that
the mere mention of it left Aureliano Segundo awash in amazement. His old fellow party members,
to whom he went asking for help, hid so as not to receive him. It was around that time that he was
heard to say. “The only difference today between Liberals and Conservatives is that the Liberals go
to mass at five o’clock and the Conservatives at eight.” Nevertheless he insisted with such
perseverance, begged in such a way, broke his code of dignity to such a degree, that with a little help
from here and a little more from there, sneaking about everywhere, with a slippery diligence and a
pitiless perseverance, he managed to put together in eight months more money than Úrsula had
buried. Then he visited the ailing Colonel Gerineldo Márquez so that he would help him start the
total war.

At a certain time Colonel Gerineldo Márquez was really the only one who could have pulled,
even from his paralytics chair, the musty strings of rebellion. After the armistice of Neerlandia, while
Colonel Aureliano Buendía took refuge with his little gold fishes, he kept in touch with the rebel
officers who had been faithful to him until the defeat. With them he waged the sad war of daily
humiliation, of entreaties and petitions, of come-back-tomorrow, of any-time-now, of we’re-
studying-your-case-with-the-proper-attention; the war hopelessly lost against the many yours-most-


trulys who should have signed and would never sign the lifetime pensions. The other war, the
bloody one of twenty years, did not cause them as much damage as the corrosive war of eternal
postponements. Even Colonel Gerineldo Márquez, who escaped three attempts on his life, survived
five wounds, and emerged unscathed from innumerable battles, succumbed to that atrocious siege of
waiting and sank into the miserable defeat of old age, thinking of Amaranta among the diamond-
shaped patches of light in a borrowed house. The last veterans of whom he had word had appeared
photographed in a newspaper with their faces shamelessly raised beside an anonymous president of
the republic who gave them buttons with his likeness on them to wear in their lapels and returned to
them a flag soiled with blood and gunpowder so that they could place it on their coffins. The others,
more honorable. were still waiting for a letter in the shadow of public charity, dying of hunger, living
through rage, ratting of old age amid the exquisite shit of glory. So that when Colonel Aureliano
Buendía invited him to start a mortal conflagration that would wipe out all vestiges of a regime of
corruption and scandal backed by the foreign invader, Colonel Gerineldo Márquez could not hold
back a shudder of compassion.

“Oh, Aureliano,” he sighed. “I already knew that you were old, but now I realize that you’re a lot
older than you look.”


Chapter 13

IN THE BEWILDERMENT of her last years, Úrsula had had very little free time to attend to the papal
education of José Arcadio, and the time came for him to get ready to leave for the seminary right
away. Meme, his sister, dividing her time between Fernanda’s rigidity and Amaranta’s bitterness, at
almost the same moment reached the age set for her to be sent to the nuns’ school, where they
would make a virtuoso on the clavichord of her. Úrsula felt tormented by grave doubts concerning
the effectiveness of the methods with which she had molded the spirit of the languid apprentice
Supreme Pontiff, but she did not put the blame on her staggering old age or the dark clouds that
barely permitted her to make out the shape of things, but on something that she herself could not
really define and that she conceived confusedly as a progressive breakdown of time. “The years
nowadays don’t pass the way the old ones used to,” she would say, feeling that everyday reality was
slipping through her hands. In the past, she thought, children took a long time to grow up. All one
had to do was remember all the time needed for José Arcadio, the elder, to go away with the gypsies
and all that happened before he came back painted like a snake and talking like an astronomer, and
the things that happened in the house before Amaranta and Arcadio forgot the language of the
Indians and learned Spanish. One had to see only the days of sun and dew that poor José Arcadio
Buendía went through under the chestnut tree and all the time weeded to mourn his death before
they brought in a dying Colonel Aureliano Buendía, who after so much war and so much suffering
from it was still not fifty years of age. In other times, after spending the whole day making candy
animals, she had more than enough time for the children, to see from the whites of their eyes that
they needed a dose of castor oil. Now, however, when she had nothing to do and would go about
with José Arcadio riding on her hip from dawn to dusk, this bad kind of time compelled her to leave
things half done. The truth was that Úrsula resisted growing old even when she had already lost
count of her age and she was a bother on all sides as she tried to meddle in everything and as she
annoyed strangers with her questions as to whether they had left a plaster Saint Joseph to be kept
until the rains were over during the days of the war. No one knew exactly when she had begun to
lose her sight. Even in her later years, when she could no longer get out of bed, it seemed that she
was simply defeated by decrepitude, but no one discovered that she was blind. She had noticed it
before the birth of José Arcadio. At first she thought it was a matter of a passing debility and she
secretly took marrow syrup and put honey on her eyes, but quite soon she began to realize that she
was irrevocably sinking into the darkness, to a point where she never had a clear notion of the
invention of the electric light, for when they put in the first bulbs she was only able to perceive the
glow. She did not tell anyone about it because it would have been a public recognition of her
uselessness. She concentrated on a silent schooling in the distances of things and peoples voices, so
that she would still be able to see with her memory what the shadows of her cataracts no longer
allowed her to. Later on she was to discover the unforeseen help of odors, which were defined in
the shadows with a strength that was much more convincing than that of bulk and color, and which
saved her finally from the shame of admitting defeat. In the darkness of the room she was able to
thread a needle and sew a buttonhole and she knew when the milk was about to boil. She knew with
so much certainty the location of everything that she herself forgot that she was blind at times. On
one occasion Fernanda had the whole house upset because she had lost her wedding ring, and
Úrsula found it on a shelf in the children’s bedroom. Quite simply, while the others were going
carelessly all about, she watched them with her four senses so that they never took her by surprise,
and after some time she discovered that every member of the family, without realizing it, repeated
the same path every day, the same actions, and almost repeated the same words at the same hour.


Only when they deviated from meticulous routine did they run the risk of losing something. So
when she heard Fernanda all upset be cause she had lost her ring, Úrsula remembered that the only
thing different that she had done that day was to put the mattresses out in the sun because Meme
had found a bedbug the might before. Since the children had been present at the fumigation, Úrsula
figured that Fernanda had put the ring in the only place where they could not reach it: the shelf.
Fernanda, on the other hand, looked for it in vain along the paths of her everyday itinerary without
knowing that the search for lost things is hindered by routine habits and that is why it is so difficult
to find them.

The rearing of José Arcadio helped Úrsula in the exhausting task of keeping herself up to date on
the smallest changes in the house. When she realized that Amaranta was dressing the saints in the
bedroom she pretended to show the boy the differences in the colors.

“Let’s see,” she would tell him. “Tell me what color the Archangel Raphael is wearing.”

In that way the child gave her the information that was denied her by her eyes, and long before
he went away to the seminary Úrsula could already distinguish the different colors of the saints’
clothing by the texture. Sometimes unforeseen accidents would happen. One afternoon when
Amaranta was ‘embroidering on the porch with the begonias Úrsula bumped into her.

“For heaven’s sake,” Amaranta protested. “watch where you’re going.”

“It’s your fault,” Úrsula said. “You’re not sitting where you’re supposed to.”

She was sure of it. But that day she began to realize something that no one had noticed and it was
that with the passage of the year the sun imperceptibly changed position and those who sat on the
porch had to change their position little by little without being aware of it. From then on Úrsula had
only to remember the date in order to know exactly where Amaranta was sitting. Even though the
trembling of her hands was more and more noticeable and the weight of her feet was too much for
her, her small figure was never seen in so many places at the same time. She was almost as diligent as
when she had the whole weight of the house on her shoulders. Nevertheless, in the impenetrable
solitude of decrepitude she had such clairvoyance as she examined the most insignificant happenings
in the family that for the first time she saw clearly the truths that her busy life in former times had
prevented her from seeing. Around the time they were preparing José Arcadio for the seminary she
had already made a detailed recapitulation of life in the house since the founding of Macondo and
had completely changed the opinion that she had always held of her descendants. She realized that
Colonel Aureliano Buendía had not lost his love for the family because he had been hardened by the
war, as she had thought before, but that he had never loved anyone, not even his wife Remedios or
the countless one-night women who had passed through his life, and much less his sons. She sensed
that he had fought so many wars not out of idealism, as everyone had thought, nor had he
renounced a certain victory because of fatigue, as everyone had thought, but that he had won and
lost for the same reason, pure and sinful pride. She reached the conclusion that the son for whom
she would have given her life was simply a man incapable of love. One night when she was carrying
him in her belly she heard him weeping. It was such a definite lament that José Arcadio Buendía
woke up beside her and was happy with the idea that his son was going to be a ventriloquist. Other
people predicted that he would be a prophet. She, on the other hand, shuddered from the certainty
that the deep moan was a first indication of the fearful pig tail and she begged God to let the child
die in her womb. But the lucidity of her old age allowed her to see, and she said so many times, that
the cries of children in their mothers’ wombs are not announcements of ventriloquism or a faculty
for prophecy but an unmistakable sign of an incapacity for love. The lowering of the image of her
son brought out in her all at once all the compassion that she owed him. Amaranta, however, whose
hardness of heart frightened her, whose concentrated bitterness made her bitter, suddenly became
clear to her in the final analysis as the most tender woman who had ever existed, and she understood
with pitying clarity that the unjust tortures to which she had submitted Pietro Crespi had not been


dictated by a desire for vengeance, as everyone had thought, nor had the slow martyrdom with
which she had frustrated the life of Colonel Gerineldo Márquez been determined by the gall of her
bitterness, as everyone had thought, but that both actions had been a mortal struggle between a
measureless love and an invincible cowardice, and that the irrational fear that Amaranta had always
had of her own tormented heart had triumphed in the end. It was during that time that Úrsula,
began to speak Rebeca’s name, bringing back the memory of her with an old love that was exalted
by tardy repentance and a sudden admiration, coming to understand that only she, Rebeca, the one
who had never fed of her milk but only of the earth of the land and the whiteness of the walls, the
one who did not carry the blood of her veins in hers but the unknown blood of the strangers whose
bones were still clocing in their grave. Rebeca, the one with an impatient heart, the one with a fierce
womb, was the only one who bad the unbridled courage that Úrsula had wanted for her line.

“Rebeca,” she would say, feeling along the walls, “how unfair we’ve been to you!”

In the house they simply thought that her mind was wandering, especially since the time she had
begun walking about with her right arm raised like the Archangel Gabriel. Fernanda, however,
realized that there was a sun of clairvoyance in the shadows of that wandering, for Úrsula could say
without hesitation how much money had been spent in the house during the previous year.
Amaranta had a similar idea one day as her mother was stirring a pot of soup in the kitchen and said
all at once without knowing that they were listening to her that the corn grinder they had bought
from the first gypsies and that had disappeared during the time before José Arcadio, had taken his
sixty-five trips around the world was still in Pilar Ternera’s house. Also almost a hundred years old,
but fit and agile in spite of her inconceivable fatness, which frightened children as her laughter had
frightened the doves in other times, Pilar Ternera was not surprised that Úrsula was correct because
her own experience was beginning to tell her that an alert old age can be more keen than the cards.

Nevertheless, when Úrsula realized that she had not had enough time to consolidate the vocation
of José Arcadio, she let herself be disturbed by consternation. She began to make mistakes, trying to
see with her eyes the things that intuition allowed her to see with greater clarity. One morning she
poured the contents of an inkwell over the boy’s head thinking that it was rose water. She stumbled
so much in her insistence in taking part in everything that she felt herself upset by gusts of bad
humor and she tried to get rid of the shadows that were beginning to wrap her in a straitjacket of
cobwebs. It was then that it occurred to her that her clumsiness was not the first victory of
decrepitude and darkness but a sentence passed by time. She thought that previously, when God did
not make the same traps out of the months and years that the Turks used when they measured a
yard of percale, things were different. Now children not only grew faster, but even feelings
developed in a different way. No sooner had Remedios the Beauty ascended to heaven in body and
soul than the inconsiderate Fernanda was going about mumbling to herself because her sheets had
been carried off. The bodies of the Aurelianos were no sooner cold in their graves than Aureliano
Segundo had the house lighted up again, filled with drunkards playing the accordion and dousing
themselves in champagne, as if dogs and not Christians had died, and as if that madhouse which had
cost her so many headaches and so many candy animals was destined to become a trash heap of
perdition. Remembering those things as she prepared José Arcadio’s trunk, Úrsula wondered if it
was not preferable to lie down once and for all in her grave and let them throw the earth over her,
and she asked God, without fear, if he really believed that people were made of iron in order to bear
so many troubles and mortifications, and asking over and over she was stirring up her own
confusion and she felt irrepressible desires to let herself go and scamper about like a foreigner and
allow herself at last an instant of rebellion, that instant yearned for so many times and so many times
postponed, putting her resignation aside and shitting on everything once and for all and drawing out
of her heart the infinite stacks of bad words that she had been forced to swallow over a century of
conformity.


“Shit!” she shouted.

Amaranta, who was starting to put the clothes into the trunk, thought that she had been bitten by
a scorpion.

“Where is it?” she asked in alarm.

“What?”

“The bug!” Amaranta said.

Úrsula put a finger on her heart.

“Here,” she said.

On Thursday, at two in the afternoon, José Arcadio left for the seminary. ‘Úrsula would
remember him always as she said good-bye to him, languid and serious, without shedding a tear, as
she had taught him, sweltering in the heat in the green corduroy suit with copper buttons and a
starched bow around his neck. He left the dining room impregnated with the penetrating fragrance
of rose water that she had sprinkled on his head so that she could follow his tracks through the
house. While the farewell lunch was going on, the family concealed its nervousness with festive
expressions and they celebrated with exaggerated enthusiasm the remarks that Father Antonio Isabel
made. But when they took out the trunk bound in velvet and with silver corners, it was as if they had
taken a coffin out of the house. The only one who refused to take part in the farewell was Colonel
Aureliano Buendía.

“That’s all we need,” he muttered. “A Pope!”

Three months later Aureliano Segundo and Fernanda took Meme to school and came back with a
clavichord, which took the place of the pianola. It was around that time that Amaranta started
sewing her own shroud. The banana fever had calmed down. The old inhabitants of Macondo found
themselves surrounded by newcomers and working hard to cling to their precarious resources of
times gone by, but comforted in any case by the sense that they had survived a shipwreck. In the
house they still had guests for lunch and the old routine was never really set up again until the
banana company left years later. Nevertheless, there were radical changes in the traditional sense of
hospitality because at that time it was Fernanda who imposed her rules. With Úrsula relegated to the
shadows and with Amaranta absorbed In the work of her winding cloth, the former apprentice
queen had the freedom to choose the guests and impose on them the rigid norms that her parents
had taught her. Her severity made the house a redoubt of old customs in a town convulsed by the
vulgarity with which the outsiders squandered their easy fortunes. For her, with no further questions
asked, proper people were those who had nothing to do with the banana company. Even José
Arcadio Segundo, her brother-in-law, was the victim of her discriminatory jealousy because during
the excitement of the first days he gave up his stupendous fighting cocks again and took a job as
foreman with the banana company.

“He won’t ever come into this house again,” Fernanda said, “as long as he carries the rash of the
foreigners.”

Such was the narrowness imposed in the house that Aureliano Segundo felt more comfortable at
Petra Cotes’s. First, with the pretext of taking the burden off his wife, he transferred his parties.
Then, with the pretext that the animals were losing their fertility, he transferred his barns and
stables. Finally, with the pretext that it was cooler in his concubine’s house, he transferred the small
office in which he handled his business. When Fernanda realized that she was a widow whose
husband had still not died, it was already too late for things to return to their former state. Aureliano
Segundo barely ate at home and the only appearances he put in, such as to sleep with his wife, were
not enough to convince anyone. One night, out of carelessness, morning found him in Petra Cotes’s
bed. Fernanda, contrary to expectations, did not reproach him in the least or give the slightest sigh
of resentment, but on the same day she sent two trunks with his clothing to the house of his
concubine. She sent them in broad daylight and with instructions that they be carried through the


middle of the street so that everyone could see them, thinking that her straying husband would be
unable to bear the shame and would return to the fold with his head hung low. But that heroic
gesture was just one more proof of how poorly Fernanda knew not only the character of her
husband but the character of a community that had nothing to do with that of her parents, for
everyone who saw the trunks pass by said that it was the natural culmination of a story whose
intimacies were known to everyone, and Aureliano Segundo celebrated the freedom he had received
with a party that lasted for three days. To the greater disadvantage of his wife, as she was entering
into a sad maturity with her somber long dresses, her old-fashioned medals, and her out-of-place
pride, the concubine seemed to be bursting with a second youth, clothed in gaudy dresses of natural
silk and with her eyes tiger-striped with a glow of vindication. Aureliano Segundo gave himself over
to her again with the fury of adolescence, as before, when Petra Cotes had not loved him for himself
but because she had him mixed up with his twin brother and as she slept with both of them at the
same time she thought that God had given her the good fortune of having a man who could make
love like two. The restored passion was so pressing that on more than one occasion they would look
each other in the eyes as they were getting ready to eat and without saying anything they would
cover their plates and go into the bedroom dying of hunger and of love. Inspired by the things he
had seen on his furtive visits to the French matrons, Aureliano Segundo bought Petra Cotes a bed
with an archiepiscopal canopy, put velvet curtains on the windows, and covered the ceiling and the
walls of the bedroom with large rock-crystal mirrors. At the same time he was more of a carouser
and spendthrift than ever. On the train, which arrived every day at eleven o’clock, he would receive
cases and more cases of champagne and brandy. On the way back from the station he would drag
the improvised cumbiamba along in full view of all the people on the way, natives or outsiders,
acquaintances or people yet to be known, without distinctions of any kind. Even the slippery Mr.
Brown, who talked only in a strange tongue, let himself be seduced by the tempting signs that
Aureliano Segundo made him and several times he got dead drunk in Petra Cotes’s house and he
even made the fierce German shepherd dogs that went everywhere with him dance to some Texas
songs that he himself mumbled in one way or another to the accompaniment of the accordion.

“Cease, cows,” Aureliano Segundo shouted at the height of the party. “Cease, because life is
short.”

He never looked better, nor had he been loved more, nor had the breeding of his animals been
wilder. There was a slaughtering of so many cows, pigs, and chickens for the endless parties that the
ground in the courtyard turned black and muddy with so much blood. It was an eternal execution
ground of bones and innards, a mud pit of leftovers, and they had to keep exploding dynamite
bombs all the time so that the buzzards would not pluck out the guests’ eyes. Aureliano Segundo
grew fat, purple-colored, turtle-shaped, because of an appetite comparable only to that of José
Arcadio when he came back from traveling around the world. The prestige of his outlandish
voracity, of his immense capacity as a spendthrift, of his unprecedented hospitality went beyond the
borders of the swamp and attracted the best-qualified gluttons from all along the coast. Fabulous
eaters arrived from everywhere to take part in the irrational tourneys of capacity and resistance that
were organized in the house of Petra Cotes. Aureliano Segundo was the unconquered eater until the
luckless Saturday when Camila Sagastume appeared, a totemic female known all through the land by
the good name of “The Elephant.” The duel lasted until dawn on Tuesday. During the first twenty-
four hours, having dispatched a dinner of veal, with cassava, yams, and fried bananas, and a case and
a half of champagne in addition, Aureliano Segundo was sure of victory. He seemed more
enthusiastic, more vital than his imperturbable adversary, who possessed a style that was obviously
more professional, but at the same time less emotional for the large crowd that filled the house.
While Aureliano Segundo ate with great bites, overcome by the anxiety of victory, The Elephant was
slicing her meat with the art of a surgeon and eating it unhurriedly and even with a certain pleasure.


She was gigantic and sturdy, but over her colossal form a tenderness of femininity prevailed and she
had a face that was so beautiful, hands so fine and well cared for, and such an irresistible personal
charm that when Aureliano Segundo saw her enter the house he commented in a low voice that he
would have preferred to have the tourney in bed and not at the table. Later on, when he saw her
consume a side of veal without breaking a single rule of good table manners, he commented
seriously that that delicate, fascinating, and insatiable proboscidian was in a certain way the ideal
woman. He was not mistaken. The reputation of a bone crusher that had preceded The Elephant
had no basis. She was not a beef cruncher or a bearded lady from a Greek circus, as had been said,
but the director of a school of voice. She had learned to eat when she was already the respectable
mother of a family, looking for a way for her children to eat better and not by means of any artificial
stimulation of their appetites but through the absolute tranquility of their spirits. Her theory,
demonstrated in practice, was based on the principle that a person who had all matters of conscience
in perfect shape should be able to eat until overcome by fatigue. And it was for moral reasons and
sporting interest that she left her school and her home to compete with a man whose fame as a
great, unprincipled eater had spread throughout the country. From the first moment she saw him
she saw that Aureliano Segundo would lose not his stomach but his character. At the end of the first
night, while The Elephant was boldly going on, Aureliano Segundo was wearing himself out with a
great deal of talking and laughing. They slept four hours. On awakening each one had the juice of
forty oranges, eight quarts of coffee, and thirty raw eggs. On the second morning, after many hours
without sleep and having put away two pigs, a bunch of bananas, and four cases of champagne, The
Elephant suspected that Aureliano Segundo had unknowingly discovered the same method as hers,
but by the absurd route of total irresponsibility. He was, therefore, more dangerous than she had
thought. Nevertheless, when Petra Cotes brought two roast turkeys to the table, Aureliano Segundo
was a step away from being stuffed.

“If you can’t, don’t eat any more,” The Elephant said to him. “Let’s call it a tie.”

She said it from her heart, understanding that she could not eat another mouthful either, out of
remorse for bringing on the death of her adversary. But Aureliano Segundo interpreted it as another
challenge and he filled himself with turkey beyond his incredible capacity. He lost consciousness. He
fell face down into the plate filled with bones, frothing at the mouth like a dog, and drowning in
moans of agony. He felt, in the midst of the darkness, that they were throwing him from the top of a
tower into a bottomless pit and in a last flash of consciousness he realized that at the end of that
endless fall death was waiting for him.

“Take me to Fernanda,” he managed to say.

His friends left him at the house thinking that they had helped him fulfill his promise to his wife
not to die in his concubine’s bed. Petra Cotes had shined his patent leather boots that he wanted to
wear in his coffin, and she was already looking for someone to take them when they came to tell her
that Aureliano Segundo was out of danger. He did recover, indeed, in less than a week, and two
weeks later he was celebrating the fact of his survival with unprecedented festivities. He continued
living at Petra Cotes’s but he would visit Fernanda every day and sometimes he would stay to eat
with the family, as if fate had reversed the situation and had made him the husband of his concubine
and the lover of his wife.

It was a rest for Fernanda. During the boredom of her abandonment her only distractions were
the clavichord lessons at siesta time and the letters from her children. In the detailed messages that
she sent them every two weeks there was not a single line of truth. She hid her troubles from them.
She hid from them the sadness of a house which, in spite of the light on the begonias, in spite of the
heaviness at two in the afternoon, in spite of the frequent waves of festivals that came in from the
street was more and more like the colonial mansion of her parents. Fernanda would wander alone
among the three living ghosts and the dead ghost of José Arcadio Buendía, who at times would


come to sit down with an inquisitive attention in the half-light of the parlor while she was playing
the clavichord. Colonel Aureliano Buendía was a shadow. Since the last time that he had gone out
into the street to propose a war without any future to Colonel Gerineldo Márquez, he left the
workshop only to urinate under the chestnut tree. He did not receive any visits except that of the
barber every three weeks, He fed on anything that Úrsula brought him once a day, and even though
he kept on making little gold fishes with the same passion as before, he stopped selling them when
he found out that people were buying them not as pieces of jewelry but as historic relics. He made a
bonfire in the courtyard of the dolls of Remedios which had decorated, their bedroom since their
wedding. The watchful Úrsula realized what her son was doing but she could not stop him.

“You have a heart of stone,” she told him.

“It’s not a question of a heart,” he said. “The room’s getting full of moths.”

Amaranta was weaving her shroud. Fernanda did not understand why she would write occasional
letters to Meme and even send her gifts and on the other hand did not even want to hear about José
Arcadio. “They’ll die without knowing why,” Amaranta answered when she was asked through
Úrsula, and that answer planted an enigma in Fernanda’s heart that she was never able to clarify.
Tall, broad-shouldered, proud, always dressed in abundant petticoats with the lace and in air of
distinction that resisted the years and bad memories, Amaranta seemed to carry the cross of ashes of
virginity on her forehead. In reality she carried it on her hand in the black bandage, which she did
not take off even to sleep and which she washed and ironed herself. Her life was spent in weaving
her shroud. It might have been said that she wove during the day and unwove during the night, and
not with any hope of defeating solitude in that way, but, quite the contrary, in order to nurture it.

The greatest worry that Fernanda had during her years of abandonment was that Meme would
come to spend her first vacation and not find Aureliano Segundo at home. His congestion had put
an end to that fear. When Meme returned, her parents had made an agreement that not only would
the girl think that Aureliano Segundo was still a domesticated husband but also that she would not
notice the sadness of the house. Every year for two months Aureliano Segundo played his role of an
exemplary husband and he organized parties with ice cream and cookies which the gay and lively
schoolgirl enhanced with the clavichord. It was obvious from then on that she had inherited very
little of her mother’s character. She seemed more of a second version of Amaranta when the latter
had not known bitterness and was arousing the house with her dance steps at the age of twelve or
fourteen before her secret passion for Pietro Crespi was to twist the direction of her heart in the
end. But unlike Amaranta, unlike all of them, Meme still did not reveal the solitary fate of the family
and she seemed entirely in conformity with the world, even when she would shut herself up in the
parlor at two in the afternoon to practice the clavichord with an inflexible discipline. It was obvious
that she liked the house, that she spent the whole year dreaming about the excitement of the young
people her arrival brought around, and that she was not far removed from the festive vocation and
hospitable excesses of her father. The first sign of that calamitous inheritance was revealed on her
third vacation, when Meme appeared at the house with four nuns and sixty-eight classmates whom
she had invited to spend a week with her family on her own Initiative and without any previous
warning.

“How awful!” Fernanda lamented. “This child is as much of a barbarian as her father!”

It was necessary to borrow beds and hammocks from the neighbors, to set up nine shifts at the
table, to fix hours for bathing, and to borrow forty stools so that the girls in blue uniforms with
masculine buttons would not spend the whole day running from one place to another. The visit was
a failure because the noisy schoolgirls would scarcely finish breakfast before they had to start taking
turns for lunch and then for dinner, and for the whole week they were able to take only one walk
through the plantations. At nightfall the nuns were exhausted, unable to move, give another order,
and still the troop of tireless adolescents was in the courtyard singing school songs out of tune. One


day they were on the point of trampling Úrsula, who made an effort to be useful precisely where she
was most in the way. On another day the nuns got all excited because Colonel Aureliano Buendía
had urinated under the chestnut tree without being concerned that the schoolgirls were in the
courtyard. Amaranta was on the point of causing panic because one of the nuns went into the
kitchen as she was salting the soup and the only thing that occurred to her to say was to ask what
those handfuls of white powder were.

“Arsenic,” Amaranta answered.

The night of their arrival the students carried on in such a way, trying to go to the bathroom
before they went to bed, that at one o’clock in the morning the last ones were still going in.
Fernanda then bought seventy-two chamberpots but she only managed to change the nocturnal
problem into a morning one, because from dawn on there was a long line of girls, each with her pot
in her hand, waiting for her turn to wash it. Although some of them suffered fevers and several of
them were infected by mosquito bites, most of them showed an unbreakable resistance as they faced
the most troublesome difficulties, and even at the time of the greatest heat they would scamper
through the garden. When they finally left, the flowers were destroyed, the furniture broken, and the
walls covered with drawings and writing, but Fernanda pardoned them for all of the damage because
of her relief at their leaving. She returned the borrowed beds and stools and kept the seventy-two
chamberpots in Melquíades’ room. The locked room, about which the spiritual life of the house
revolved in former times, was known from that time on as the “chamberpot room.” For Colonel
Aureliano Buendía it was the most appropriate name, because while the rest of the family was still
amazed by the fact that Melquíades’ room was immune to dust and destruction, he saw it turned
into a dunghill. In any case, it did not seem to bother him who was correct, and if he found out
about the fate of the room it was because Fernanda kept passing by and disturbing his work for a
whole afternoon as she put away the chamberpots.

During those days José Arcadio Segundo reappeared in the house. He went along the porch
without greeting anyone and he shut himself up in the workshop to talk to the colonel. In spite of
the fact that she could not see him, Úrsula analyzed the clicking of his foreman’s boots and was
surprised at the unbridgeable distance that separated him from the family, even from the twin
brother with whom he had played ingenious games of confusion in childhood and with whom he no
longer had any traits in common. He was linear, solemn, and had a pensive air and the sadness of a
Saracen and a mournful glow on his face that was the color of autumn. He was the one who most
resembled his mother, Santa Sofía de la Piedad. Úrsula reproached herself for the habit of forgetting
about him when she spoke about the family, but when she sensed him in the house again and
noticed that the colonel let him into the workshop during working hours, she reexamined her old
memories and confirmed the belief that at some moment in childhood he had changed places with
his twin brother, because it was he and not the other one who should have been called Aureliano.
No one knew the details of his life. At one time it was discovered that he had no fixed abode, that
he raised fighting cocks at Pilar Ternera’s house and that sometimes he would stay there to sleep but
that he almost always spent the night in the rooms of the French matrons. He drifted about, with no
ties of affection, with no ambitions, like a wandering star in Úrsula’s planetary system.

In reality, José Arcadio Segundo was not a member of the family, nor would he ever be of any
other since that distant dawn when Colonel Gerineldo Márquez took him to the barracks, not so
that he could see an execution, but so that for the rest of his life he would never forget the sad and
somewhat mocking smile of the man being shot. That was not only his oldest memory, but the only
one he had of his childhood. The other one, that of an old man with an old-fashioned vest and a hat
with a brim like a crow’s wings who told him marvelous things framed in a dazzling window, he was
unable to place in any period. It was an uncertain memory, entirely devoid of lessons or nostalgia,
the opposite of the memory of the executed man, which had really set the direction of his life and


would return to his memory clearer and dearer as he grew older, as if the passage of time were
bringing him closer to it. Úrsula tried to use José Arcadio Segundo to get Colonel Aureliano
Buendía. to give up his imprisonment. “Get him to go to the movies,” she said to him. “Even if he
doesn’t like the picture, as least he’ll breathe a little fresh air.” But it did not take her long to realize
that he was as insensible to her begging as the colonel would have been, and that they were armored
by the same impermeability of affection. Although she never knew, nor did anyone know, what they
spoke about in their prolonged sessions shut up in the workshop, she understood that they were
probably the only members of the family who seemed drawn together by some affinity.

The truth is that not even José Arcadio Segundo would have been able to draw the colonel out of
his confinement. The invasion of schoolgirls had lowered the limits of his patience. With the pretext
that his wedding bedroom was at the mercy of the moths in spite of the destruction of Remedios’
appetizing dolls, he hung a hammock in the workshop and then he would leave it only to go into the
courtyard to take care of his necessities. Úrsula was unable to string together even a trivial
conversation with him. She knew that he did not look at the dishes of food but would put them at
one end of his workbench while he finished a little fish and it did not matter to him if the soup
curdled or if the meat got cold. He grew harder and harder ever since Colonel Gerineldo Márquez
refused to back him up in a senile war. He locked himself up inside himself and the family finally
thought of him is if he were dead. No other human reaction was seen in him until one October
eleventh, when he went to the. street door to watch a circus parade. For Colonel Aureliano Buendía
it had been a day just like all those of his last years. At five o’clock in the morning the noise of the
toads and crickets outside the wall woke him up. The drizzle had persisted since Saturday and there
was no necessity for him to hear their tiny whispering among the leaves of the garden because he
would have felt the cold in his bones in any case. He was, as always, wrapped in his woolen blanket
and wearing his crude cotton long drawers, which he still wore for comfort, even though because of
their musty, old-fashioned style he called them his “Goth drawers.” He put on his tight pants but
did not button them up, nor did he put the gold button into his shirt collar as he always did, because
he planned to take a bath. Then he put the blanket over his head like a cowl. brushed his dripping
mustache with his fingers, and went to urinate in the courtyard. There was still so much time left for
the sun to come out that José Arcadio Buendía was still dozing under the shelter of palm fronds that
had been rotted by the rain. He did not see him, as he had never seen him, nor did he hear the
incomprehensible phrase that the ghost of his father addressed to him as he awakened, startled by
the stream of hot urine that splattered his shoes. He put the bath off for later, not because of the
cold and the dampness, but because of the oppressive October mist. On his way back to the
workshop he noticed the odor of the wick that Santa Sofía de la Piedad was using to light the stoves,
and he waited in the kitchen for the coffee to boil so that he could take along his mug without sugar.
Santa Sofía de la Piedad asked him, as on every morning, what day of the week it was, and he
answered that it was Tuesday, October eleventh. Watching the glow of the fire as it gilded the
persistent woman who neither then nor in any instant of her life seemed to exist completely, he
suddenly remembered that on one October eleventh in the middle of the war he had awakened with
the brutal certainty that the woman with whom he had slept was dead. She really was and he could
not forget the date because she had asked him an hour before what day it was. In spite of the
memory he did not have an awareness this time either of to what degree his omens had abandoned
him and while the coffee was boiling he kept on thinking out of pure curiosity but without the
slightest risk of nostalgia about the woman whose name he had never known and whose face he had
not seen because she had stumbled to his hammock in the dark. Nevertheless, in the emptiness of so
many women who came into his life in the same way, he did not remember that she was the one
who in the delirium of that first meeting was on the point of foundering in her own tears and
scarcely an hour before her death had sworn to love him until she died. He did not think about her


again or about any of the others after he went into the workshop with the steaming cup, and he
lighted the lamp in order to count the little gold fishes, which he kept in a tin pail. There were
seventeen of them. Since he had decided not to sell any, he kept on making two fishes a day and
when he finished twenty-five he would melt them down and start all over again. He worked all
morning, absorbed, without thinking about anything, without realizing that at ten o’clock the rain
had grown stronger and someone ran past the workshop shouting to close the doors before the
house was flooded, and without thinking even about himself until Úrsula came in with his lunch and
turned out the light.

“What a rain!” Úrsula said.

“October,” he said.

When he said it he did not raise his eyes from the first little fish of the day because he was putting
in the rubies for the eyes. Only when he finished it and put it with the others in the pail did he begin
to drink the soup. Then, very slowly, he ate the piece of meat roasted with onions, the white rice,
and the slices of fried bananas all on the same plate together. His appetite did not change under
either the best or the harshest of circumstances. After lunch he felt the drowsiness of inactivity.
Because of a kind of scientific superstition he never worked, or read, or bathed, or made love until
two hours of digestion had gone by, and it was such a deep-rooted belief that several times he held
up military operations so as not to submit the troops to the risks of indigestion. So he lay down in
the hammock, removing the wax from his ears with a penknife, and in a few minutes he was asleep.
He dreamed that he was going into an empty house with white walls and that he was upset by the
burden of being the first human being to enter it. In the dream he remembered that he had dreamed
the same thing the night before and on many nights over the past years and he knew that the image
would be erased from his memory when he awakened because that recurrent dream had the quality
of not being remembered except within the dream itself. A moment later, indeed, when the barber
knocked at the workshop door, Colonel Aureliano Buendía awoke with the impression that he had
fallen asleep involuntarily for a few seconds and that he had not had time to dream anything.

“Not today.” he told the barber. “We’ll make it on Friday.”

He had a three-day beard speckled with white hairs, but he did not think it necessary to shave
because on Friday he was going to have his hair cut and it could all be done at the same time. The
sticky sweat of the unwanted siesta aroused the scars of the sores in his armpits. The sky had cleared
but the sun had not come out. Colonel Aureliano Buendía released a sonorous belch which brought
back the acidity of the soup to his palate and which was like a command from his organism to throw
his blanket over his shoulders and go to the toilet. He stayed there longer than was necessary,
crouched over the dense fermentation that was coming out of the wooden box until habit told him
that it was time to start work again. During the time he lingered he remembered again that it was
Tuesday, and that José Arcadio Segundo had not come to the workshop because it was payday on
the banana company farms. That recollection, as all of those of the past few years, led him to think
about the war without his realizing it. He remembered that Colonel Gerineldo Márquez had once
promised to get him a horse with a white star on its face and that he had never spoken about it
again. Then he went on toward scattered episodes but he brought them back without any judgment
because since he could not think about anything else, he had learned to think coldly so that
inescapable memories would not touch any feeling. On his way back to the workshop, seeing that
the air was beginning to dry out, he decided that it was a good time to take a bath, but Amaranta had
got there ahead of him. So he started on the second little fish of the day. He was putting a hook on
the tail when the sun came out with such strength that the light creaked like a fishing boat. The air,
which had been washed by the three-day drizzle, was filled with flying ants. Then he came to the
realization that he felt like urinating and he had been putting it off until he had finished fixing the
little fish. He went out into the courtyard at ten minutes after four, when he heard the distant brass


instruments, the beating of the bass drum and the shouting of the children, and for the first time
since his youth he knowingly fell into a trap of nostalgia and relived that prodigious afternoon Of
the gypsies when his father took him to see ice. Santa Sofía de la Piedad dropped what she was
doing in the kitchen and ran to the door.

“It’s the circus,” she shouted.

Instead of going to the chestnut tree, Colonel Aureliano Buendía also went to the street door and
mingled with the bystanders who, were watching the parade. He saw a woman dressed in gold sitting
on the head of an elephant. He saw a sad dromedary. He saw a bear dressed like a Dutch girl
keeping time to the music with a soup spoon and a pan. He saw the clowns doing cartwheels at the
end of the parade and once more he saw the face of his miserable solitude when everything had
passed by and there was nothing but the bright expanse of the street and the air full of flying ants
with a few onlookers peering into the precipice of uncertainty. Then he went to the chestnut tree,
thinking about the circus, and while he urinated he tried to keep on thinking about the circus, but he
could no longer find the memory. He pulled his head in between his shoulders like a baby chick and
remained motionless with his forehead against the trunk of the chestnut tree. The family did not
find him until the following day at eleven o’clock in the morning when Santa Sofía de la Piedad went
to throw out the garbage in back and her attention was attracted by the descending vultures.


Chapter 14

MEME’S LAST VACATIONS coincided with the period of mourning for Colonel Aureliano Buendía.
The shuttered house was no place for parties. They spoke in whispers, ate in silence, recited the
rosary three times a day, and even clavichord practice during the heat of siesta time had a funereal
echo. In spite of her secret hostility toward the colonel, it was Fernanda who imposed the rigor of
that mourning, impressed by the solemnity with which the government exalted the memory of its
dead enemy. Aureliano Segundo, as was his custom came back to sleep in the house during his
daughter’s vacation and Fernanda must have done some. thing to regain her privileges as his
legitimate wife because the following year Meme found a newborn little sister who against the
wishes of her mother had been baptized with the name Amaranta Úrsula.

Meme had finished her course of study. The diploma that certified her as a concert clavichordist
was ratified by the virtuosity with which she executed popular melodies of the seventeenth century
at the gathering organized to celebrate the completion of her studies and with which the period of
mourning came to in end. More than her art, the guests admired her duality. Her frivolous and even
slightly infantile character did not seem up to any serious activity, but when she sat down at the
clavichord she became a different girl, one whose unforeseen maturity gave her the air of an adult.
That was how she had always been. She really did am have any definite vocation, but she had earned
the highest grades by means of inflexible discipline simply in order not to annoy her mother. They
could have imposed on her an apprenticeship in any other field and the results would have been the
same. Since she had been very small she had been troubled by Fernanda’s strictness, her custom of
deciding in favor of extremes; and she would have been capable of a much more difficult sacrifice
than the clavichord lessons merely not to run up against her intransigence. During the graduation
ceremonies she had the impression that the parchment with Gothic letters and illuminated capitals
was freeing her from a compromise that she had accepted not so much out of obedience as out of
convenience, and she thought that from then on not even the insistent Fernanda would worry any
more about an instrument that even the nuns looked upon as a museum fossil. During the first years
she thought that her calculations were mistaken because after she had put half the town to sleep, not
only in the parlor but also at all charitable functions, school ceremonies, and patriotic celebrations
that took place in Macondo, her mother still invited to the house every newcomer whom she
thought capable of appreciating her daughter’s virtues. Only after the death of Amaranta, when the
family shut itself up again in a period of mourning, was Meme able to lock the clavichord and forget
the key in some dresser drawer without Fernanda’s being annoyed on finding out when and through
whose fault it had been lost. Meme bore up under the exhibitions with the same stoicism that she
had dedicated to her apprenticeship. It was the price of her freedom. Fernanda was so pleased with
her docility and so proud of the admiration that her art inspired that she was never against the house
being fall of girl friends, her spending the afternoon in the groves, and going to the movies with
Aureliano Segundo or some muted lady as long as the film was approved by Father Antonio Isabel
from the pulpit. During those moments of relaxation Meme’s real tastes were revealed. Her
happiness lay at the other extreme from discipline, in noisy parties, in gossip about lovers, in
prolonged sessions with her girl friends, where they learned to smoke and talked about male
business, and where they once got their hands on some cane liquor and ended up naked, measuring
and comparing the parts of their bodies. Meme would never forget that night when she arrived
home chewing licorice lozenges, and without noticing their consternation, sat down at the table
where Fernanda and Amaranta were eating dinner without saying a word to each other. She had
spent two tremendous hours in the bedroom of a girl friend, weeping with laughter and fear, and


beyond an crises she had found the rare feeling of. bravery that she needed in order to run away
from school and tell her mother in one way or another that she could use the clavichord as an
enema. Sitting at the head of the table, drinking a chicken broth that landed in her stomach like an
elixir of resurrection, Meme then saw Fernanda and Amaranta wrapped in an accusatory halo of
reality. She had to make a great effort not to throw at them their prissiness, their poverty of spirit
their delusions of grandeur. From the time of her second vacation she had known that her father
was living at home only in order to keep up appearances, and knowing Fernanda as she did and
having arranged later to meet Petra Cotes, she thought that her father was right. She also would have
preferred being the daughter of the concubine. In the haziness of the alcohol Meme thought with
pleasure about the scandal that would have taken place if she were to express her thoughts at that
moment, and the intimate satisfaction of her roguishness was so intense that Fernanda noticed it.

“What’s the matter?” she asked.

“Nothing,” Meme answered. “I was only now discovering how much I loved you both.”

Amaranta was startled by the obvious burden of hate that the declaration carried. But Fernanda
felt so moved that she thought she would go mad when Meme awoke at midnight with her head
splitting with pain and drowning in vomited gall. She gave her a vial of castor oil, put compresses on
her stomach and ice cubes on her head, and she made her stay in bed for five days and follow the
diet ordered by the new and outlandish French doctor, who after examining her for more than two
hours reached the foggy conclusion that she had an ailment peculiar to women. Having lost her
courage, in a miserable state of demoralization, Meme had no other recourse but to bear up under it.
Úrsula, completely blind by then but still active and lucid, was the only one who guessed the exact
diagnosis. “As far as I can see,” she thought, “that’s the same thing that happens to drunken
people.” But she not only rejected the idea, she reproached herself for the frivolity of her thought.
Aureliano Segundo felt a twinge of conscience when he saw Meme’s state of prostration and he
promised himself to take better care of her in the future. That was how the relationship of jolly
comradeship was born between father and daughter, which freed him for a time from the bitter
solitude of his revels and freed her from Fernanda’s watchful eye without necessity of provoking the
domestic crisis that seemed inevitable by then. At that time Aureliano Segundo postponed any
appointments in order to be with Meme, to take her to the movies or the circus, and he spent the
greater part of his idle time with her. In recent times his annoyance with the absurd obesity that
prevented him from tying his shoes and his abusive satisfaction with all manner of appetites had
began to sour his character. The discovery of his daughter restored his former joviality and the
pleasure of being with her was slowly leading him away from dissipation. Meme was entering a
fruitful age. She was not beautiful, as Amaranta had never been, but on the other hand she was
pleasant, uncomplicated, and she had the virtue of making a good impression on people from the
first moment. She had a modem spirit that wounded the antiquated sobriety and poorly disguised
miserly heart of Fernanda, and that, on the other hand, Aureliano Segundo took pleasure in
developing. It was he who resolved to take her out of the bedroom she had occupied since
childhood, where the fearful eyes of the saints still fed her adolescent terrors, and he furnished for
her a room with a royal bed, a large dressing table, and velvet curtains, not realizing that he was
producing a second version of Petra Cotes’s room. He was so lavish with Meme that he did not
even know how much money he gave her because she herself would take it out of his pockets, and
he kept abreast of every kind of new beauty aid that arrived in the commissary of the banana
company. Meme’s room became filled with pumice-stone cushions to polish her nails with, hair
curlers, toothbrushes, drops to make her eyes languid, and so many and such new cosmetics and
artifacts of beauty that every time Fernanda went into the room she was scandalized by the idea that
her daughter’s dressing table must have been the same as those of the French matrons. Nevertheless
Fernanda divided her time in those days between little Amaranta Úrsula, who was mischievous and


sickly, and a touching correspondence with the invisible physicians. So that when she noticed the
complicity between father and daughter the only promise she extracted from Aureliano Segundo was
that he would never take Meme to Petra Cotes’s house. It was a meaningless demand because the
concubine was so annoyed with the comradeship between her lover and his daughter that she did
not want anything to do with her. Petra was tormented by an unknown fear, as if instinct were
telling her that Meme, by just wanting it, could succeed in what Fernanda had been unable to do:
deprive her of a love that by then she considered assured until death. For the first time Aureliano
Segundo had to tolerate the harsh expressions and the violent tirades of his concubine, and he was
even afraid that his wandering trunks would make the return journey to his wife’s house. That did
not happen. No one knew a man better than Petra Cotes knew her lover and she knew that the
trunks would remain where they had been sent because if Aureliano Segundo detested anything it
was complicating his life with modifications and changes. So the trunks stayed where they were and
Petra Cotes set about reconquering the husband by sharpening the only weapons that his daughter
could not use on him. It too was an unnecessary effort because Meme had no desire to intervene in
her father’s affairs and if she had, it would certainly have been in favor of the concubine. She had no
time to bother anybody. She herself swept her room and made her bed, as the nuns had taught her.
In the morning she took care of her clothes, sewing on the porch or using Amaranta’s old pedal
machine. While the others were taking their siestas she would practice the clavichord for two hours,
knowing that the daily sacrifice would keep Fernanda calm. For the same reason she continued
giving concerts at church fairs and school parties, even though the requests were less and less
frequent. At nightfall she would fix herself up, put on one of her simple dresses and her stiff high
shoes, and if she had nothing to do with her father she would go to the homes of her girl friends,
where she would stay until dinnertime. It was rare that Aureliano Segundo would not call for her
then to take her to the movies.

Among Meme’s friends there were three young American girls who broke through the electrified
chicken fence barrier and made friends with girls from Macondo. One of them was Patricia Brown.
Grateful for the hospitality of Aureliano Segundo, Mr. Brown opened the doors of his house to
Meme and invited her to the Saturday dances, which were the only ones where gringos and natives
mingled. When Fernanda found out about it she forgot about Amaranta Úrsula and the invisible
doctors for a moment and became very melodramatic. “Just think,” she said to Meme, “what the
colonel must be thinking in his grave.” She sought, of course, the backing of Úrsula. But the blind
old woman, contrary to what everyone expected, saw nothing reproachable in Meme’s going to the
dances and making friends with American girls her own age as long as she kept her strict habits and
was not converted to the Protestant religion. Meme sensed the thought of her great-great-
grandmother very well and the day after the dances she would get up earlier than usual to go to
mass. Fernanda’s opposition lasted until the day when Meme broke down her resistance with the
news that the Americans wanted to hear her play the clavichord. The instrument was taken out of
the house again and carried to Mr. Brown’s, where the young concert artist really did receive very
sincere applause and the most enthusiastic congratulations. From then on she was invited not only
to the dances but also to the Sunday swim parties in the pool and to lunch once a week. Meme
learned to swim like a professional, to play tennis, and to eat Virginia ham with slices of pineapple.
Among dances, swimming, and tennis she soon found herself getting involved in the English
language. Aureliano Segundo was so enthusiastic over the progress of his daughter that from a
traveling salesman he bought a six-volume English encyclopedia with many color prints which
Meme read in her spare time. The reading occupied the attention that she had formerly given to
gossip about sweethearts and the experimental retreats that she would go through with her girl
friends, not because it was imposed as discipline but because she had lost all interest by then in
talking about mysteries that were in the public domain. She looked back on the drunken episode as


an infantile adventure and it seemed so funny to her that she told Aureliano Segundo about it and he
thought it was more amusing than she did. “If your mother only knew,” he told her, doubling up
with laughter, as he always said when he told her something in confidence. He had made her
promise that she would let him know about her first love affair with the same confidence, and
Meme told him that she liked a redheaded American boy who had come to spend his vacation with
his parents. “What do you know,” Aureliano Segundo said, laughing. “If your mother only knew.”
But Meme also told him that the boy had gone back to his country and had disappeared from sight.
The maturity of her judgment ensured peace in the family. Aureliano Segundo then devoted more
time to Petra Cotes, and although his body and soul no longer permitted him the debauches of days
gone by, he lost no chance to arrange them and to dig out the accordion, which by then had some
keys held in place by shoelaces. At home, Amaranta was weaving her interminable shroud and
Úrsula dragged about in her decrepitude through the depths of the shadows where the only thing
that was still visible was the ghost of José Arcadio Buendía under the chestnut tree. Fernanda
consolidated her authority. Her monthly letters to her son José Arcadio at that time did not carry a
string of lies and she hid from him only her correspondence with the invisible doctors, who had
diagnosed a benign tumor in her large intestine and were preparing her for a telepathic operation.

It might have been aid that peace and happiness reigned for a long time in the tired mansion of
the Buendías if it had not been for the sudden death of Amaranta, which caused a new uproar. It
was an unexpected event. Although she was old and isolated from everyone, she still looked firm
and upright and with the health of a rock that she had always had. No one knew her thoughts since
the afternoon on which she had given Colonel Gerineldo Márquez his final rejection and shut
herself up to weep. She was not seen to cry during the ascension to heaven of Remedios the Beauty
or over the extermination of the Aurelianos or the death of Colonel Aureliano Buendía, who was the
person she loved most in this world, although she showed it only when they found his body under
the chestnut tree. She helped pick up the body. She dressed him in his soldier’s uniform, shaved
him, combed his hair, and waxed his mustache better than he had ever done in his days of glory. No
one thought that there was any love in that act because they were accustomed to the familiarity of
Amaranta with the rites of death. Fernanda was scandalized that she did not understand the
relationship of Catholicism with life but only its relationship with death, as if it were not a religion
but a compendium of funeral conventions. Amaranta was too wrapped up in the eggplant patch of
her memories to understand those subtle apologetics. She had reached old age with all of her
nostalgias intact. When she listened to the waltzes of Pietro Crespi she felt the same desire to weep
that she had had in adolescence, as if time and harsh lessons had meant nothing. The rolls of music
that she herself had thrown into the trash with the pretext that they had rotted from dampness kept
spinning and playing in her memory. She had tried to sink them into the swampy passion that she
allowed herself with her nephew Aureliano José and she tried to take refuge in the calm and virile
protection of Colonel Gerineldo Márquez, but she had not been able to overcome them, not even
with the most desperate act of her old age when she would bathe the small José Arcadio three years
before he was sent to the seminary and caress him not as a grandmother would have done with a
grandchild, but as a woman would have done with a man, as it was said that the French matrons did
and as she had wanted to do with Pietro Crespi at the age of twelve, fourteen, when she saw him in
his dancing tights and with the magic wand with which he kept time to the metronome. At times It
pained her to have let that outpouring of misery follow its course, and at times it made her so angry
that she would prick her fingers with the needles, but what pained her most and enraged her most
and made her most bitter was the fragrant and wormy guava grove of love that was dragging her
toward death. Just as Colonel Aureliano Buendía thought about his war, unable to avoid it, so
Amaranta thought about Rebeca. But while her brother had managed to sterilize his memories, she
had only managed to make hers more scalding. The only thing that she asked of God for many years


was that he would not visit on her the punishment of dying before Rebeca. Every time she passed by
her house and noted the progress of destruction she took comfort in the idea that God was listening
to her. One afternoon, when she was sewing on the porch, she was assailed by the certainty that she
would be sitting in that place, in the same position, and under the same light when they brought her
the news of Rebeca’s death. She sat down to wait for it, as one waits for a letter, and the fact was
that at one time she would pull off buttons to sew them on again so that inactivity would not make
the wait longer and more anxious. No one in the house realized that at that time Amaranta was
sewing a fine shroud for Rebeca. Later on, when Aureliano Triste told how he had seen her changed
into an apparition with leathery skin and a few golden threads on her skull, Amaranta was not
surprised because the specter described was exactly what she had been imagining for some time. She
had decided to restore Rebeca’s corpse, to disguise with paraffin the damage to her face and make a
wig for her from the hair of the saints. She would manufacture a beautiful corpse, with the linen
shroud and a plush-lined coffin with purple trim. and she would put it at the disposition of the
worms with splendid funeral ceremonies. She worked out the plan with such hatred that it made her
tremble to think about the scheme, which she would have carried out in exactly the same way if it
had been done out of love, but she would not allow herself to become upset by the confusion and
went on perfecting the details so minutely that she came to be more than a specialist and was a
virtuoso in the rites of death. The only thing that she did not keep In mind in her fearsome plan was
that in spite of her pleas to God she might die before Rebeca. That was, in fact, what happened. At
the final moment, however, Amaranta did not feel frustrated, but on the contrary, free of all
bitterness because death had awarded her the privilege of announcing itself several years ahead of
time. She saw it on one burning afternoon sewing with her on the porch a short time after Meme
had left for school. She saw it because it was a woman dressed in blue with long hair, with a sort of
antiquated look, and with a certain resemblance to Pilar Ternera during the time when she had
helped with the chores in the kitchen. Fernanda was present several times and did not see her, in
spite of the fact that she was so real, so human, and on one occasion asked of Amaranta the favor of
threading a needle. Death did not tell her when she was going to die or whether her hour was
assigned before that of Rebeca, but ordered her to begin sewing her own shroud on the next sixth of
April. She was authorized to make it as complicated and as fine as she wanted, but just as honestly
executed as Rebeca’s, and she was told that she would die without pain, fear, or bitterness at dusk on
the day that she finished it. Trying to waste the most time possible, Amaranta ordered some rough
flax and spun the thread herself. She did it so carefully that the work alone took four years. Then she
started the sewing. As she got closer to the unavoidable end she began to understand that only a
miracle would allow her to prolong the work past Rebeca’s death, but the very concentration gave
her the calmness that she needed to accept the idea of frustration. It was then that she understood
the vicious circle of Colonel Aureliano Buendía’s little gold fishes. The world was reduced to the
surface of her skin and her inner self was safe from all bitterness. It pained her not to have had that
revelation many years before when it had still been possible to purify memories and reconstruct the
universe under a new light and evoke without trembling Pietro Crespi’s smell of lavender at dusk
and rescue Rebeca from her slough of misery, not out of hatred or out of love but because of the
measureless understanding of solitude. The hatred that she noticed one night in Memes words did
not upset her because it was directed at her, but she felt the repetition of another adolescence that
seemed as clean as hers must have seemed and that, however, was already tainted with rancor. But
by then her acceptance of her fate was so deep that she was not even upset by the certainty that all
possibilities of rectification were closed to her. Her only objective was to finish the shroud. Instead
of slowing it down with useless detail as she had done in the beginning, she speeded up the work.
One week before she calculated that she would take the last stitch on the night of February 4, and
without revealing the motives, she suggested to Meme that she move up a clavichord concert that


she had arranged for the day after, but the girl paid no attention to her. Amaranta then looked for a
way to delay for forty-eight hours, and she even thought that death was giving her her way because
on the night of February fourth a storm caused a breakdown at the power plant. But on the
following day, at eight in the morning, she took the last stitch in the most beautiful piece of work
that any woman had ever finished, and she announced without the least bit of dramatics that she
was going to die at dusk. She not only told the family but the whole town, because Amaranta had
conceived of the idea that she could make up for a life of meanness with one last favor to the world,
and she thought that no one was in a better position to take letters to the dead.

The news that Amaranta Buendía was sailing at dusk carrying the mail of death spread
throughout Macondo before noon, and at three in the afternoon there was a whole carton full of
letters in the parlor. Those who did not want to write gave Amaranta verbal messages, which she
wrote down in a notebook with the name and date of death of the recipient. “Don’t worry,” she told
the senders. “The first thing I’ll do when I get there is to ask for him and give him your message.” It
was farcical. Amaranta did not show any upset or the slightest sign of grief, and she even looked a
bit rejuvenated by a duty accomplished. She was as straight and as thin as ever. If it had not been for
her hardened cheekbones and a few missing teeth, she would have looked much younger than she
really was. She herself arranged for them to put the letters in a box sealed with pitch and told them
to place it in her grave in a way best to protect it from the dampness. In the morning she had a
carpenter called who took her measurements for the coffin as she stood in the parlor, as if it were
for a new dress. She showed such vigor in her last hours that Fernanda thought she was making fun
of everyone. Úrsula, with the experience that Buendías died without any illness, did not doubt at all
that Amaranta had received an omen of death, but in any case she was tormented by the fear that
with the business of the letters and the anxiety of the senders for them to arrive quickly they would
bury her alive in their confusion. So she set about clearing out the house, arguing with the intruders
as she shouted at them, and by four in the afternoon she was successful. At that time Amaranta had
finished dividing her things among the poor and had left on the severe coffin of unfinished boards
only the change of clothing and the simple cloth slippers that she would wear in death. She did not
neglect that precaution because she remembered that when Colonel Aureliano Buendía died they
had to buy a pair of new shoes for him because all he had left were the bedroom slippers that he
wore in the workshop. A little before five Aureliano Segundo came to fetch Meme for the concert
and was surprised that the house was prepared for the funeral. if anyone seemed alive at the moment
it was the serene Amaranta, who had even had enough time to cut her corns. Aureliano Segundo
and Meme took leave of her with mocking farewells and promised her that on the following
Saturday they would have a big resurrection party. Drawn by the public talk that Amaranta Buendía
was receiving letters for the dead, Father Antonio Isabel arrived at five o’clock for the last rites and
he had to wait for more than fifteen minutes for the recipient to come out of her bath. When he saw
her appear in a madapollam nightshirt and with her hair loose over her shoulders, the decrepit parish
priest thought that it was a trick and sent the altar boy away. He thought however, that he would
take advantage of the occasion to have Amaranta confess after twenty years of reticence. Amaranta
answered simply that she did not need spiritual help of any kind because her conscience was clean.
Fernanda was scandalized. Without caring that people could hear her she asked herself aloud what
horrible sin Amaranta had committed to make her prefer an impious death to the shame of
confession. Thereupon Amaranta lay down and made Úrsula give public testimony as to her
virginity.

“Let no one have any illusions,” she shouted so that Fernanda would hear her. “Amaranta
Buendía is leaving this world just as she came into it.

She did not get up again. Lying on cushions, as if she really were ill, she braided her long hair and
rolled it about her ears as death had told her it should be on her bier. Then she asked Úrsula for a


mirror and for the first time in more than forty years she saw her face, devastated by age and
martyrdom, and she was surprised at how much she resembled the mental image that she had of
herself. Úrsula understood by the silence in the bedroom that it had begun to grow dark.

“Say good-bye to Fernanda,” she begged her. One minute of reconciliation is worth more than a
whole life of friendship.”

“It’s of no use now,” Amaranta replied.

Meme could not help thinking about her when they turned on the lights on the improvised stage
and she began the second part of the program. In the middle of the piece someone whispered the
news in her ear and the session stopped. When he arrived home, Aureliano Segundo had to push his
way through the crowd to see the corpse of the aged virgin, ugly and discolored, with the black
bandage on her hand and wrapped in the magnificent shroud. She was laid out in the parlor beside
the box of letters.

Úrsula did not get up again after the nine nights of mourning for Amaranta, Santa Sofía de la
Piedad took care of her. She took her meals to her bedroom and annatto water for her to wash in
and she kept her up to date on everything that happened in Macondo. Aureliano Segundo visited her
frequently and he brought her clothing which she would place beside the bed along with the things
most indispensable for daily life, so that in a short time she had built up a world within reach of her
hand. She managed to arouse a great love in little Amaranta Úrsula, who was just like her, and whom
she taught how to read. Her lucidity, the ability to be sufficient un herself made one think that she
was naturally conquered by the weight of her hundred years, but even though it was obvious that she
was having trouble seeing, no one suspected that she was totally blind. She had so much time at her
disposal then and so much interior silence to watch over the life of the house that she was the first
to notice Meme’s silent tribulation.

“Come here,” she told her. “Now that were alone, confess to this poor old woman what’s
bothering you.”

Meme avoided the conversation with a short laugh. Úrsula did not insist, but she ended up
confirming her suspicions when Meme did not come back to visit her. She knew that she was getting
up earlier than usual, that she did not have a moment’s rest as she waited for the time for her to go
out, that she spent whole nights walking back and forth in the adjoining bedroom, and that the
fluttering of a butterfly would bother her. On one occasion she said that she was going to see Aureli-
ano Segundo and Úrsula was surprised that Fernanda’s imagination was so limited when her
husband came to the house looking for his daughter. It was too obvious that Meme was involved in
secret matters, in pressing matters, in repressed anxieties long before the night that Fernanda upset
the house because she caught her kissing a man in the movies.

Meme was so wrapped up in herself at that time that she accused Úrsula of having told on her.
Actually, she told on herself. For a long time she had been leaving a trail that would have awakened
the most drowsy person and it took Fernanda so long to discover it because she too was befogged,
by her relationship with the invisible doctors. Even so she finally noticed the deep silences, the
sudden outbursts, the changes in mood, and the contradictions of her daughter. She set about on a
disguised but implacable vigilance. She let her go out with her girl friends as always, she helped her
get dressed for the Saturday parties, and she never asked an embarrassing question that might arouse
her. She already had a great deal of proof that Meme was doing different things from what she said,
and yet she would give no indication of her suspicions, hoping for the right moment. One night
Meme said that she was going to the movies with her father. A short time later Fernanda heard the
fireworks of the debauch and the unmistakable accordion of Aureliano Segundo from the direction
of Petra Cotes’s place. Then she got dressed, went to the movie theater, and in the darkness of the
seats she recognized her daughter. The upsetting feeling of certainty stopped her from seeing the
man she was kissing, but she managed to hear his tremulous voice in the midst of the deafening


shouts and laughter of the audience. “I’m sorry, love,” she heard him say, and she took Meme out of
the place without saying a word to her, put her through the shame of parading her along the noisy
Street of the Turks, and locked her up in her bedroom.

On the following day at six in the afternoon, Fernanda recognized the voice of the man who
came to call on her. He was young, sallow, with dark and melancholy eyes which would not have
startled her so much if she had known the gypsies, and a dreamy air that to any woman with a heart
less rigid would have been enough to make her understand her daughter’s motives. He was wearing
a shabby linen suit with shoes that showed the desperate defense of superimposed patches of white
zinc, and in his hand he was carrying a straw hat he had bought the Saturday before. In all of his life
he could never have been as frightened as at that moment, but he had a dignity and presence that
spared him from humiliation and a genuine elegance that was defeated only by tarnished hands and
nails that had been shattered by rough work. Fernanda, however, needed only one look to guess his
status of mechanic. She saw that he was wearing his one Sunday suit and that underneath his shirt he
bore the rash of the banana company. She would not let him speak. She would not even let him
come through the door, which a moment later she had to close because the house was filled with
yellow butterflies.

“Go away,” she told him. “You’ve got no reason to come calling on any decent person.”

His name was Mauricio Babilonia. He had been born and raised in Macondo, and he was an
apprentice mechanic in the banana company garage. Meme had met him by chance one afternoon
when she went with Patricia Brown to get a car to take a drive through the groves. Since the
chauffeur was sick they assigned him to take them and Meme was finally able to satisfy her desire to
sit next to the driver and see what he did. Unlike the regular chauffeur, Mauricio Babilonia gave her
a practical lesson. That was during the time that Meme was beginning to frequent Mr. Brown’s
house and it was still considered improper for a lady to drive a car. So she was satisfied with the
technical information and she did not see Mauricio Babilonia again for several months. Later on she
would remember that during the drive her attention had been called to his masculine beauty, except
for the coarseness of his hands, but that afterward she had mentioned to Patricia Brown that she
had been bothered by his rather proud sense of security. The first Saturday that she went to the
movies with her father she saw Mauricio Babilonia again, with his linen suit, sitting a few seats away
from them, and she noticed that he was not paying much attention to the film in order to turn
around and look at her. Meme was bothered by the vulgarity of that. Afterward Mauricio Babilonia
came over to say hello to Aureliano Segundo and only then did Meme find out that they knew each
other because he had worked in Aureliano Triste’s early power plant and he treated her father with
the air of an employee. That fact relieved the dislike that his pride had caused in her. They had never
been alone together nor had they spoken except in way of greeting, the night when she dreamed that
he was saving her from a shipwreck and she did not feel gratitude but rage. It was as if she had given
him the opportunity he was waiting for, since Meme yearned for just the opposite, not only with
Mauricio Babilonia but with any other man who was interested in her. Therefore she was so
indignant after the dream that instead of hating him, she felt an irresistible urge to see him. The
anxiety became more intense during the course of the week and on Saturday it was so pressing that
she had to make a great effort for Mauricio Babilonia not to notice that when he greeted her in the
movies her heart was in her mouth. Dazed by a confused feeling of pleasure and rage, she gave him
her hand for the first time and only then did Mauricio Babilonia let himself shake hers. Meme
managed to repent her impulse in a fraction of a second but the repentance changed immediately
into a cruel satisfaction on seeing that his hand too was sweaty and cold. That night she realized that
she would not have a moment of rest until she showed Mauricio Babilonia the uselessness of his
aspiration and she spent the week turning that anxiety about in her mind. She resorted to all kinds of
useless tricks so that Patricia Brown would go get the car with her. Finally she made use of the


American redhead who was spending his vacation in Macondo at that time and with the pretext of
learning about new models of cars she had him take her to the garage. From the moment she saw
him Meme let herself be deceived by herself and believed that what was really going on was that she
could not bear the desire to be alone with Mauricio Babilonia, and she was made indignant by the
certainty that he understood that when he saw her arrive.

“I came to see the new models,” Meme said.

“That’s a fine excuse,” he said.

Meme realized that he was burning in the heat of his pride, and she desperately looked for a way
to humiliate him. But he would not give her any time. “Don’t get upset,” he said to her in a low
voice. “It’s not the first time that a woman has gone crazy over a man.” She felt so defeated that she
left the garage without seeing the new models and she spent the night turning over in bed and
weeping with indignation. The American redhead, who was really beginning to interest her, looked
like a baby in diapers. It was then that she realized that the yellow butterflies preceded the
appearances of Mauricio Babilonia. She had seen them before, especially over the garage, and she
had thought that they were drawn by the smell of paint. Once she had seen them fluttering about
her head before she went into the movies. But when Mauricio Babilonia began to pursue her like a
ghost that only she could identify in the crowd, she understood that the butterflies had something to
do with him. Mauricio Babilonia was always in the audience at the concerts, at the movies, at high
mass, and she did not have to see him to know that he was there, because the butterflies were always
there. Once Aureliano Segundo became so impatient with the suffocating fluttering that she felt the
impulse to confide her secret to him as she had promised, but instinct told her that he would laugh
as usual and say: “What would your mother say if she found out?” One morning, while she was
pruning the roses, Fernanda let out a cry of fright and had Meme taken away from the spot where
she was, which was the same place in the garden where Remedios the Beauty had gone up to
heaven. She had thought for an instant that the miracle was going to be repeated with her daughter,
because she had been bothered by a sudden flapping of wings. It was the butterflies. Meme saw
them as if they had suddenly been born out of the light and her heart gave a turn. At that moment
Mauricio Babilonia came in with a package that according to what he said, was a present from
Patricia Brown. Meme swallowed her blush, absorbed her tribulation, and even managed a natural
smile as she asked him the favor of leaving it on the railing because her hands were dirty from the
garden. The only thing that Fernanda noted in the man whom a few months later she was to expel
from the house without remembering where she had seen him was the bilious texture of his skin.

“He’s a very strange man,” Fernanda said. “You can see in his face that he’s going to die.”

Meme thought that her mother had been impressed by the butterflies When they finished
pruning the row bushes she washed her hands and took the package to her bedroom to open it. It
was a kind of Chinese toy, made up of five concentric boxes, and in the last one there was a card
laboriously inscribed by someone who could barely write: We’ll get together Saturday at the movies. Meme
felt with an aftershock that the box had been on the railing for a long time within reach of
Fernanda’s curiosity, and although she was flattered by the audacity and ingenuity of Mauricio
Babilonia, she was moved by his Innocence in expecting that she would keep the date. Meme knew
at that time that Aureliano Segundo had an appointment on Saturday night. Nevertheless, the fire of
anxiety burned her so much during the course of the week that on Saturday she convinced her father
to leave her alone in the theater and come back for her after the show. A nocturnal butterfly
fluttered about her head while the lights were on. And then it happened. When the lights went out,
Mauricio Babilonia sat down beside her. Meme felt herself splashing in a bog of hesitation from
which she could only be rescued, as had occurred in her dreams, by that man smelling of grease
whom she could barely see in the shadows.

“If you hadn’t come,” he said, “You never would have seen me again.”


Meme felt the weight of his hand on her knee and she knew that they were both arriving at the
other side of abandonment at that instant.

“What shocks me about you,” she said, smiling, “is that you always say exactly what you
shouldn’t be saying.”

She lost her mind over him. She could not sleep and she lost her appetite and sank so deeply into
solitude that even her father became an annoyance. She worked out an intricate web of false dates to
throw Fernanda off the track, lost sight of her girl friends, leaped over conventions to be with
Mauricio Babilonia at any time and at any place. At first his crudeness bothered her. The first time
that they were alone on the deserted fields behind the garage he pulled her mercilessly into an animal
state that left her exhausted. It took her time to realize that it was also a form of tenderness and it
was then that she lost her calm and lived only for him, upset by the desire to sink into his stupefying
odor of grease washed off by lye. A short time before the death of Amaranta she suddenly stumbled
into in open space of lucidity within the madness and she trembled before the uncertainty of the
future. Then she heard about a woman who made predictions from cards and went to see her in
secret. It was Pilar Ternera. As soon as Pilar saw her come in she was aware of Meme’s hidden
motives. “Sit down,” she told her. “I don’t need cards to tell the future of a Buendía,” Meme did not
know and never would that the centenarian witch was her great-grandmother. Nor would she have
believed it after the aggressive realism with which she revealed to her that the anxiety of falling in
love could not find repose except in bed. It was the same point of view as Mauricio Babilonia’s, but
Meme resisted believing it because underneath it all she imagined that it had been inspired by the
poor judgment of a mechanic. She thought then that love on one side was defeating love on the
other, because it was characteristic of men to deny hunger once their appetites were satisfied. Pilar
Ternera not only cleared up that mistake, she also offered the old canopied bed where she had
conceived Arcadio, Meme’s grandfather, and where afterward she conceived Aureliano José. She
also taught her how to avoid an unwanted conception by means of the evaporation of mustard
plasters and gave her recipes for potions that in cases of trouble could expel “even the remorse of
conscience.” That interview instilled In Meme the same feeling of bravery that she had felt on the
drunken evening. Amaranta’s death, however, obliged her to postpone the decision. While the nine
nights lasted she did not once leave the side of Mauricio Babilonia, who mingled with the crowd that
invaded the house. Then came the long period of mourning and the obligatory withdrawal and they
separated for a time. Those were days of such inner agitation, such irrepressible anxiety, and so
many repressed urges that on the first evening that Meme was able to get out she went straight to
Pilar Ternera’s. She surrendered to Mauricio Babilonia, without resistance, without shyness, without
formalities, and with a vocation that was so fluid and an intuition that was so wise that a more
suspicious man than hers would have confused them with obvious experience. They made love
twice a week for more than three months, protected by the innocent complicity of Aureliano
Segundo, who believed without suspicion in his daughter’s alibis simply in order to set her free from
her mother’s rigidity.

On the night that Fernanda surprised them in the movies Aureliano Segundo felt weighted down
by the burden of his conscience and he visited Meme in the bedroom where Fernanda kept her
locked up, trusting that she would reveal to him the confidences that she owed him. But Meme
denied everything. She was so sure of herself, so anchored in her solitude that Aureliano Segundo
had the impression that no link existed between them anymore, that the comradeship and the
complicity were nothing but an illusion of the past. He thought of speaking to Mauricio Babilonia,
thinking that his authority as his former boss would make him desist from his plans, but Petra Cotes
convinced him that it was a woman’s business, so he was left floating in a limbo of indecision, barely
sustained by the hope that the confinement would put an end to his daughter’s troubles.


Meme showed no signs of affliction. On the contrary, from the next room Úrsula perceived the
peaceful rhythm of her sleep, the serenity of her tasks, the order of her meals, and the good health
of her digestion. The only thing that intrigued Úrsula after almost two months of punishment was
that Meme did not take a bath in the morning like everyone else, but at seven in the evening. Once
she thought of warning her about the scorpions, but Meme was so distant, convinced that she had
given her away, that she preferred not to disturb her with the impertinences, of a great-great-
grandmother. The yellow butterflies would invade the house at dusk. Every night on her way back
from her bath Meme would find a desperate Fernanda killing butterflies with an insecticide bomb.
“This is terrible,” she would say, “All my life they told me that butterflies at night bring bad luck.”
One night while Meme was in the bathroom, Fernanda went into her bedroom by chance and there
were so many butterflies that she could scarcely breathe. She grabbed for the nearest piece of cloth
to shoo them away and her heart froze with terror as she connected her daughter’s evening baths
with the mustard plasters that rolled onto the floor. She did not wait for an opportune moment as
she had the first time. On the following day she invited the new mayor to lunch. Like her, he had
come down from the highlands, and she asked him to station a guard in the backyard because she
had the impression that hens were being stolen. That night the guard brought down Mauricio
Babilonia as he was lifting up the tiles to get into the bathroom where Meme was waiting for him,
naked and trembling with love among the scorpions and butterflies as she had done almost every
night for the past few months. A bullet lodged in his spinal column reduced him to his bed for the
rest of his life. He died of old age in solitude, without a moan, without a protest, without a single
moment of betrayal, tormented by memories and by the yellow butterflies, who did not give him a
moment’s peace, and ostracized as a chicken thief.


Chapter 15

THE EVENTS that would deal Macondo its fatal blow were just showing themselves when they
brought Meme Buendía’s son home. The public situation was so uncertain then that no one had
sufficient spirit to become involved with private scandals, so that Fernanda was able to count on an
atmosphere that enabled her to keep the child hidden as if he had never existed. She had to take him
in because the circumstances under which they brought him made rejection impossible. She had to
tolerate him against her will for the rest of her life because at the moment of truth she lacked the
courage to go through with her inner determination to drown him in the bathroom cistern. She
locked him up in Colonel Aureliano Buendía’s old workshop. She succeeded in convincing Santa
Sofía de la Piedad that she had found him floating in a basket. Úrsula would die without ever
knowing his origin. Little Amaranta Úrsula, who went into the workshop once when Fernanda was
feeding the child, also believed the version of the floating basket. Aureliano Segundo, having broken
finally with his wife because of the irrational way in which she handled Meme’s tragedy, did not
know of the existence of his grandson until three years after they brought him home, when the child
escaped from captivity through an oversight on Fernanda’s part and appeared on the porch for a
fraction of a second, naked, with matted hair, and with an impressive sex organ that was like a
turkey’s wattles, as if he were not a human child but the encyclopedia definition of a cannibal.

Fernanda had not counted on that nasty trick of her incorrigible fate. The child was like the
return of a shame that she had thought exiled by her from the house forever. As soon as they carried
off Mauricio Babilonia with his shattered spinal column, Fernanda had worked out the most minute
details of a plan destined to wipe out all traces of the burden. Without consulting her husband, she
packed her bags, put the three changes of clothing that her daughter would need into a small
suitcase, and went to get her in her bedroom a half hour before the train arrived.

“Let’s go, Renata,” she told her.

She gave no explanation. Meme, for her part, did not expect or want any. She not only did not
know where they were going, but it would have been the same to her if they had been taking her to
the slaughterhouse. She had not spoken again nor would she do so for the rest of her life from the
time that she heard the shot in the backyard and the simultaneous cry of pain from Mauricio
Babilonia. When her mother ordered her out of the bedroom she did not comb her hair or wash her
face and she got into the train as if she were walking in her sleep, not even noticing the yellow
butterflies that were still accompanying her. Fernanda never found out nor did she take the trouble
to, whether that stony silence was a determination of her will or whether she had become mute
because of the impact of the tragedy. Meme barely took notice of the journey through the formerly
enchanted region. She did not see the shady, endless banana groves on both sides of the tracks. She
did not see the white houses of the gringos or their gardens, dried out by dust and heat, or the
women in shorts and blue-striped shirts playing cards on the terraces. She did not see the oxcarts on
the dusty roads loaded down with bunches of bananas. She did not see the girls diving into the
transparent rivers like tarpons, leaving the passengers on the train with the bitterness of their
splendid breasts, or the miserable huts of the workers all huddled together where Mauricio Babilo-
nia’s yellow butterflies fluttered about and in the doorways of which there were green and squalid
children sitting on their pots, and pregnant women who shouted insults at the train. That fleeting
vision, which had been a celebration for her when she came home from school, passed through
Meme’s heart without a quiver. She did not look out of the window, not even when the burning
dampness of the groves ended and the train went through a poppy-laden plain where the carbonized


skeleton of the Spanish galleon still sat and then came out into the dear air alongside the frothy, dirty
sea where almost a century before José Arcadio Buendía’s illusions had met defeat.

At five o’clock in the afternoon, when they had come to the last station in the swamp, she got
out of the train because Fernanda made her. They got into a small carriage that looked like an
enormous bat, drawn by an asthmatic horse, and they went through the desolate city in the endless
streets of which, split by saltiness, there was the sound of a piano lesson just like the one that
Fernanda heard during the siestas of her adolescence. They went on board a riverboat, the wooden
wheel of which had a sound of conflagration, and whose rusted metal plates reverberated like the
mouth of an oven. Meme shut herself up in her cabin. Twice a day Fernanda left a plate of food by
her bed and twice a day she took it away intact, not because Meme had resolved to die of hunger,
but because even the smell of food was repugnant to her and her stomach rejected even water. Not
even she herself knew that her fertility had outwitted the mustard vapors, just as Fernanda did not
know until almost a year later, when they brought the child. In the suffocating cabin, maddened by
the vibration of the metal plates and the unbearable stench of the mud stirred up by the paddle
wheel, Meme lost track of the days. Much time had passed when she saw the last yellow butterfly
destroyed in the blades of the fan and she admitted as an irremediable truth that Mauricio Babilonia
had died. She did not let herself be defeated by resignation, however. She kept on thinking about
him during the arduous muleback crossing of the hallucinating plateau where Aureliano Segundo
had become lost when he was looking for the most beautiful woman who had ever appeared on the
face of the earth, and when they went over the mountains along Indian trails and entered the gloomy
city in whose stone alleys the funereal bronze bells of thirty-two churches tolled. That night they
slept in the abandoned colonial mansion on boards that Fernanda laid on the floor of a room
invaded by weeds, wrapped in the shreds of curtains that they pulled off the windows and that fell to
pieces with every turn of the body. Meme knew where they were because in the flight of her
insomnia she saw pass by the gentleman dressed in black whom they delivered to the house inside a
lead box on one distant Christmas Eve. On the following day, after mass, Fernanda took her to a
somber building that Meme recognized immediately from her mother’s stories of the convent where
they had raised her to be a queen, and then she understood that they had come to the end of the
journey. While Fernanda was speaking to someone in the office next door, Meme remained in a
parlor checkered with large oil paintings of colonial archbishops, still wearing an etamine dress with
small black flowers and stiff high shoes which were swollen by the cold of the uplands. She was
standing in the center of the parlor thinking about Mauricio Babilonia under the yellow stream of
light from the stained glass windows when a very beautiful novice came out of the office carrying
her suitcase with the three changes of clothing. As she passed Meme she took her hand without
stopping.

“Come, Renata,” she said to her.

Meme took her hand and let herself be led. The last time that Fernanda saw her, trying to keep
up with the novice, the iron grating of the cloister had just closed behind her. She was still thinking
about Mauricio Babilonia, his smell of grease, and his halo of butterflies, and she would keep on
thinking about him for all the days of her life until the remote autumn morning when she died of old
age, with her name changed and her head shaved and without ever having spoken a word, in a
gloomy hospital in Cracow.

Fernanda returned to Macondo on a train protected by armed police. During the trip she noticed
the tension of the passengers, the military preparations in the towns along the line, and an
atmosphere rarified by the certainty that something serious was going to happen, but she had no
information until she reached Macondo and they told her that José Arcadio Segundo was inciting
the workers of the banana company to strike. “That’s all we need,” Fernanda said to herself. “An
anarchist in the family.” The strike broke out two weeks later and it did not have the dramatic


consequences that had been feared. The workers demanded that they not be obliged to cut and load
bananas on Sundays, and the position seemed so just that even Father Antonio Isabel interceded in
its favor because he found it in accordance with the laws of God. That victory, along with other
actions that were initiated during the following months, drew the colorless José Arcadio Segundo
out of his anonymity, for people had been accustomed to say that he was only good for filling up the
town with French whores. With the same impulsive decision with which he had auctioned off his
fighting cocks in order to organize a harebrained boat business, he gave up his position as foreman
in the banana company and took the side of the workers. Quite soon he was pointed out as the
agent of an international conspiracy against public order. One night, during the course of a week
darkened by somber rumors, he miraculously escaped four revolver shots taken at him by an
unknown party as he was leaving a secret meeting. The atmosphere of the following months was so
tense that even Úrsula perceived it in her dark corner, and she had the impression that once more
she was living through the dangerous times when her son Aureliano carried the homeopathic pills of
subversion in his pocket. She tried to speak to José Arcadio Segundo, to let him know about that
precedent, but Aureliano Segundo told her that since the night of the attempt on his life no one
knew his whereabouts.

“Just like Aureliano,” Úrsula exclaimed. “It’s as if the world were repeating itself.”

Fernanda, was immune to the uncertainty of those days. She had no contact with the outside
world since the violent altercation she had had with her husband over her having decided Memes
fate without his consent. Aureliano Segundo was prepared to rescue his daughter with the help of
the police if necessary, but Fernanda showed him some papers that were proof that she had entered
the convent of her own free will. Meme had indeed signed once she was already behind the iron
grating and she did it with the same indifference with which she had allowed herself to be led away.
Underneath it all, Aureliano Segundo did not believe in the legitimacy of the proof. Just as he never
believed that Mauricio Babilonia had gone into the yard to steal chickens, but both expedients
served to ease his conscience, and thus he could go back without remorse under the shadow of Petra
Cotes, where he revived his noisy revelry and unlimited gourmandizing. Foreign to the restlessness
of the town, deaf to Úrsula’s quiet predictions. Fernanda gave the last tam to the screw of her
preconceived plan. She wrote a long letter to her son José Arcadio, who was then about to take his
first orders, and in it she told him that his sister Renata had expired in the peace of the Lord and as a
consequence of the black vomit. Then she put Amaranta Úrsula under the care of Santa Sofía de la
Piedad and dedicated herself to organizing her correspondence with the invisible doctors, which had
been upset by Meme’s trouble. The first thing that she did was to set a definite date for the
postponed telepathic operation. But the invisible doctors answered her that it was not wise so long
as the state of social agitation continued in Macondo. She was so urgent and so poorly Informed
that she explained to them In another letter that there was no such state of agitation and that
everything was the result of the lunacy of a brother-in-law of hers who was fiddling around at that
time in that labor union nonsense just as he had been involved with cockfighting and riverboats
before. They were still not in agreement on the hot Wednesday when an aged nun knocked at the
door bearing a small basket on her arm. When she opened the door Santa Sofía de la Piedad thought
that it was a gift and tried to take the small basket that was covered with a lovely lace wrap. But the
nun stopped her because she had instructions to give it personally and with the strictest secrecy to
Doña Fernanda del Carpio de Buendía. It was Meme’s son. Fernanda’s former spiritual director
explained to her in a letter that he had been born two months before and that they had taken the
privilege of baptizing him Aureliano, for his grandfather, because his mother would not open her
lips to tell them her wishes. Fernanda rose up inside against that trick of fate, but she had sufficient
strength to hide it in front of the nun.

“We’ll tell them that we found him floating in the basket,” she said smiling.


“No one will believe it,” the nun said.

“If they believe it in the Bible,” Fernanda replied, “I don’t see why they shouldn’t believe it from
me.”

The nun lunched at the house while she waited for the train back, and in accordance with the
discretion they asked of her, she did not mention the child again, but Fernanda viewed her as an
undesirable witness of her shame and lamented the fact that they had abandoned the medieval
custom of hanging a messenger who bore bad news. It was then that she decided to drown the child
in the cistern as soon as the nun left, but her heart was not strong enough and she preferred to wait
patiently until the infinite goodness of God would free her from the annoyance.

The new Aureliano was a year old when the tension of the people broke with no forewarning.
José Arcadio Segundo and other union leaders who had remained underground until then suddenly
appeared one weekend and organized demonstrations in towns throughout the banana region. The
police merely maintained public order. But on Monday night the leaders were taken from their
homes and sent to jail in the capital of the province with two-pound irons on their legs. Taken
among them were José Arcadio Segundo and Lorenzo Gavilán, a colonel in the Mexican revolution,
exiled in Macondo, who said that he had been witness to the heroism of his comrade Artemio Cruz.
They were set free, however, within three months because of the fact that the government and the
banana company could not reach an agreement as to who should feed them in jail. The protests of
the workers this time were based on the lack of sanitary facilities in their living quarters, the
nonexistence of medical services, and terrible working conditions. They stated, furthermore, that
they were not being paid in real money but in scrip, which was good only to buy Virginia ham in the
company commissaries. José Arcadio Segundo was put in jail because he revealed that the scrip
system was a way for the company to finance its fruit ships; which without the commissary
merchandise would have to return empty from New Orleans to the banana ports. The other
complaints were common knowledge. The company physicians did not examine the sick but had
them line up behind one another in the dispensaries and a nurse would put a pill the color of copper
sulfate on their tongues, whether they had malaria, gonorrhea, or constipation. It was a cure that was
so common that children would stand in line several times and instead of swallowing the pills would
take them home to use as bingo markers. The company workers were crowded together in miserable
barracks. The engineers, instead of putting in toilets, had a portable latrine for every fifty people
brought to the camps at Christmas time and they held public demonstrations of how to use them so
that they would last longer. The decrepit lawyers dressed in black who during other times had
besieged Colonel Aureliano Buendía and who now were controlled by the banana company
dismissed those demands with decisions that seemed like acts of magic. When the workers drew up
a list of unanimous petitions, a long time passed before they were able to notify the banana company
officially. As soon as he found out about the agreement Mr. Brown hitched his luxurious glassed-in
coach to the train and disappeared from Macondo along with the more prominent representatives of
his company. Nonetheless some workers found one of them the following Saturday in a brothel and
they made him sign a copy of the sheet with the demands while he was naked with the women who
had helped to entrap him. The mournful lawyers showed in court that that man had nothing to do
with the company and in order that no one doubt their arguments they had him jailed as an
impostor. Later on, Mr. Brown was surprised traveling incognito, in a third-class coach and they
made him sign another copy of the demands. On the following day he appeared before the judges
with his hair dyed black and speaking flawless Spanish. The lawyers showed that the man was not
Mr. Jack Brown, the superintendent of the banana company, born in Prattville Alabama, but a
harmless vendor of medicinal plants, born in Macondo and baptized there with the name of
Dagoberto Fonseca. A while later, faced with a new attempt by the workers the lawyers publicly
exhibited Mr. Brown’s death certificate, attested to by consuls and foreign ministers which bore


witness that on June ninth last he had been run over by a fire engine in Chicago. Tired of that
hermeneutical delirium, the workers turned away from the authorities in Macondo and brought their
complaints up to the higher courts. It was there that the sleight-of-hand lawyers proved that the
demands lacked all validity for the simple reason that the banana company did not have, never had
had, and never would have any workers in its service because they were all hired on a temporary and
occasional basis. So that the fable of the Virginia ham was nonsense, the same as that of the
miraculous pills and the Yuletide toilets, and by a decision of the court it was established and set
down in solemn decrees that the workers did not exist.

The great strike broke out. Cultivation stopped halfway, the fruit rotted on the trees and the
hundred-twenty-car trains remained on the sidings. The idle workers overflowed the towns. The
Street of the Turks echoed with a Saturday that lasted for several days and in the poolroom at the
Hotel Jacob they had to arrange twenty-four-hour shifts. That was where José Arcadio Segundo was
on the day it was announced that the army had been assigned to reestablish public order. Although
he was not a man given to omens, the news was like an announcement of death that he had been
waiting for ever since that distant morning when Colonel Gerineldo Márquez had let him see an
execution. The bad omen did not change his solemnity, however. He took the shot he had planned
and it was good. A short time later the drumbeats, the shrill of the bugle, the shouting and running
of the people told him that not only had the game of pool come to an end, but also the silent and
solitary game that he had been playing with himself ever since that dawn execution. Then he went
out into the street and saw them. There were three regiments, whose march in time to a galley drum
made the earth tremble. Their snorting of a many-headed dragon filled the glow of noon with a
pestilential vapor. They were short, stocky, and brutelike. They perspired with the sweat of a horse
and had a smell of suntanned hide and the taciturn and impenetrable perseverance of men from the
uplands. Although it took them over an hour to pass by, one might have thought that they were only
a few squads marching in a circle, because they were all identical, sons of the same bitch, and with
the same stolidity they all bore the weight of their packs and canteens, the shame of their rifles with
fixed bayonets, and the chancre of blind obedience and a sense of honor. Úrsula heard them pass
from her bed in the shadows and she made a crow with her fingers. Santa Sofía de la Piedad existed
for an instant, leaning over the embroidered tablecloth that she had just ironed, and she thought of
her son, José Arcadio Segundo, who without changing expression watched the last soldiers pass by
the door of the Hotel Jacob.

Martial law enabled the army to assume the functions of arbitrator in the controversy, but no
effort at conciliation was made. As soon as they appeared in Macondo, the soldiers put aside their
rifles and cut and loaded the bananas and started the trains running. The workers, who had been
content to wait until then, went into the woods with no other weapons but their working machetes
and they began to sabotage the sabotage. They burned plantations and commissaries, tore up tracks
to impede the passage of the trains that began to open their path with machine-gun fire, and they cut
telegraph and telephone wires. The irrigation ditches were stained with blood. Mr. Brown, who was
alive in the electrified chicken coop, was taken out of Macondo with his family and those of his
fellow countrymen and brought to a safe place under the protection of the army. The situation was
threatening to lead to a bloody and unequal civil war when the authorities called upon the workers
to gather in Macondo. The summons announced that the civil and military leader of the province
would arrive on the following Friday ready to intercede in the conflict.

José Arcadio Segundo was in the crowd that had gathered at the station on Friday since early in
the morning. He had taken part in a meeting of union leaders and had been commissioned, along
with Colonel Gavilán, to mingle in the crowd and orient it according to how things went. He did not
feel well and a salty paste was beginning to collect on his palate when he noticed that the army had
set up machine-gun emplacements around the small square and that the wired city of the banana


company was protected by artillery pieces. Around twelve o’clock, waiting for a train that was not
arriving, more than three thousand people, workers, women, and children, had spilled out of the
open space in front of the station and were pressing into the neighboring streets, which the army
had closed off with rows of machine guns. At that time it all seemed more like a jubilant fair than a
waiting crowd. They had brought over the fritter and drink stands from the Street of the Turks and
the people were in good spirits as they bore the tedium of waiting and the scorching sun. A short
time before three o’clock the rumor spread that the official train would not arrive until the following
day. The crowd let out a sigh of disappointment. An army lieutenant then climbed up onto the roof
of the station where there were four machine-gun emplacements aiming at the crowd and called for
silence. Next to José Arcadio Segundo there was a barefooted woman, very fat, with two children
between the ages of four and seven. She was carrying the smaller one and she asked José Arcadio
Segundo, without knowing him, if he would lift up the other one so that he could hear better. José
Arcadio Segundo put the child on his shoulders. Many years later that child would still tell, to the
disbelief of all, that he had seen the lieutenant reading Decree No. 4 of the civil and military leader
of the province through an old phonograph horn. It had been signed by General Carlos Cortes
Vargas and his secretary, Major Enrique García Isaza, and in three articles of eighty words he
declared the strikers to be a “bunch of hoodlums” and he authorized the army to shoot to kill.

After the decree was read, in the midst of a deafening hoot of protest, a captain took the place of
the lieutenant on the roof of the station and with the horn he signaled that he wanted to speak. The
crowd was quiet again.

“Ladies and gentlemen,” the captain said in a low voice that was slow and a little tired. “you have
five minutes to withdraw.”

The redoubled hooting and shouting drowned out the bugle call that announced the start of the
count. No one moved.

Five minutes have passed,” the captain said in the same tone. “One more minute and we’ll open
fire.”

José Arcadio Segundo, sweating ice, lowered the child and gave him to the woman. “Those
bastards might just shoot,” she murmured. José Arcadio Segundo did not have time to speak
because at that instant he recognized the hoarse voice of Colonel Gavilán echoing the words of the
woman with a shout. Intoxicated by the tension, by the miraculous depth of the silence, and
furthermore convinced that nothing could move that crowd held tight in a fascination with death,
José Arcadio Segundo raised himself up over the heads in front of him and for the first time in his
life he raised his voice.

“You bastards!” he shouted. “Take the extra minute and stick it up your ass!”

After his shout something happened that did not bring on fright but a kind of hallucination. The
captain gave the order to fire and fourteen machine guns answered at once. But it all seemed like a
farce. It was as if the machine guns had been loaded with caps, because their panting rattle could be
heard and their incandescent spitting could be seen, but not the slightest reaction was perceived, not
a cry, not even a sigh among the compact crowd that seemed petrified by an instantaneous
invulnerability. Suddenly, on one side-of the station, a cry of death tore open the enchantment:
“Aaaagh, Mother.” A seismic voice, a volcanic breath. the roar of a cataclysm broke out in the center
of the crowd with a great potential of expansion. José Arcadio Segundo barely had time to pick up
the child while the mother with the other one was swallowed up by the crowd that swirled about in
panic.

Many years later that child would still tell, in spite of people thinking that he was a crazy old man,
how José Arcadio Segundo had lifted him over his head and hauled him, almost in the air, as if
floating on the terror of the crowd, toward a nearby street. The child’s privileged position allowed


him to see at that moment that the wild mass was starting to get to the corner and the row of
machine guns opened fire. Several voices shouted at the same time:

“Get down! Get down!”

The people in front had already done so, swept down by the wave of bullets. The survivors,
instead of getting down, tried to go back to the small square, and the panic became a dragon’s tail as
one compact wave ran against another which was moving in the opposite direction, toward the
other dragon’s tail In the street across the way, where the machine guns were also firing without
cease. They were Penned in. swirling about in a gigantic whirlwind that little by little was being
reduced to its epicenter as the edges were systematically being cut off all around like an onion being
peeled by the insatiable and methodical shears of the machine guns. The child saw a woman
kneeling with her arms in the shape of a cross in an open space, mysteriously free of the stampede.
José Arcadio Segundo put him up there at the moment he fell with his face bathed in blood, before
the colossal troop wiped out the empty space, the kneeling woman, the light of the high, drought-
stricken sky, and the whorish world where Úrsula Iguarán had sold so many little candy animals.

When José Arcadio Segundo came to he was lying face up in the darkness. He realized that he
was riding on an endless and silent train and that his head was caked with dry blood and that all his
bones ached. He felt an intolerable desire to sleep. Prepared to sleep for many hours, safe from the
terror and the horror, he made himself comfortable on the side that pained him less, and only then
did he discover that he was lying against dead people. There was no free space in the car except for
an aisle in the middle. Several hours must have passed since the massacre because the corpses had
the same temperature as a plaster in autumn and the same consistency of petrified foam that it had,
and those who had put them in the car had had time to pile them up in the same way in which they
transported bunches of bananas. Trying to flee from the nightmare, José Arcadio Segundo dragged
himself from one car to an other in the direction in which the train was heading, and in the flashes
of light that broke through the wooden slats as they went through sleeping towns he saw the man
corpses, woman corpses, child corpses who would be thrown into the sea like rejected bananas. He
recognized only a woman who sold drinks in the square and Colonel Gavilán, who still held
wrapped in his hand the belt with a buckle of Morelia silver with which he had tried to open his way
through the panic. When he got to the first car he jumped into the darkness and lay beside the tracks
until the train had passed. It was the longest one he had ever seen, with almost two hundred freight
cars and a locomotive at either end and a third one in the middle. It had no lights, not even the red
and green running lights, and it slipped off with a nocturnal and stealthy velocity. On top of the cars
there could be seen the dark shapes of the soldiers with their emplaced machine guns.

After midnight a torrential cloudburst came up. José Arcadio Segundo did not know where it was
that he had jumped off, but he knew that by going in the opposite direction to that of the train he
would reach Macondo. After walking for more than three hours, soaked to the skin, with a terrible
headache, he was able to make out the first houses in the light of dawn. Attracted by the smell of
coffee, he went into a kitchen where a woman with a child in her arms was leaning over the stove.

“Hello,” he said, exhausted. “I’m José Arcadio Segundo Buendía.”

He pronounced his whole name, letter by letter, in order to convince her that he was alive. He
was wise in doing so, because the woman had thought that he was an apparition as she saw the dirty,
shadowy figure with his head and clothing dirty with blood and touched with the solemnity of death
come through the door. She recognized him. She brought him a blanket so that he could wrap
himself up while his clothes dried by the fire, she warmed some water to wash his wound, which was
only a flesh wound, and she gave him a clean diaper to bandage his head. Then she gave him a mug
of coffee without sugar as she had been told the Buendías drank it, and she spread his clothing out
near the fire.

José Arcadio Segundo did not speak until he had finished drinking his coffee.


“There must have been three thousand of them” he murmured.

“What?”

“The dead,” he clarified. “It must have been an of the people who were at the station.”

The woman measured him with a pitying look. “There haven’t been any dead here,” she said.
“Since the time of your uncle, the colonel, nothing has happened in Macondo.” In the three kitchens
where José Arcadio Segundo stopped before reaching home they told him the same thing. “There
weren’t any dead. He went through the small square by the station and he saw the fritter stands piled
one on top of the other and he could find no trace of the massacre. The streets were deserted under
the persistent rain and the houses locked up with no trace of life inside. The only human note was
the first tolling of the bells for mass. He knocked at the door at Colonel Gavilán’s house. A pregnant
woman whom he had seen several times closed the door in his face. “He left,” she said, frightened.
“He went back to his own country.” The main entrance to the wire chicken coop was guarded as
always by two local policemen who looked as if they were made of stone under the rain, with
raincoats and rubber boots. On their marginal street the West Indian Negroes were singing Saturday
psalms. José Arcadio Segundo jumped over the courtyard wall and entered the house through the
kitchen. Santa Sofía de la Piedad barely raised her voice. “Don’t let Fernanda see you,” she said.
“She’s just getting up.” As if she were fulfilling an implicit pact, she took her son to the
“chamberpot room.” arranged Melquíades’ broken-down cot for him and at two in the afternoon,
while Fernanda was taking her siesta, she passed a plate of food in to him through the window.

Aureliano Segundo had slept at home because the rain had caught him time and at three in the
afternoon he was still waiting for it to clear. Informed in secret by Santa Sofía de la Piedad, he
visited his brother in Melquíades’ room at that time. He did not believe the version of the massacre
or the nightmare trip of the train loaded with corpses traveling toward the sea either. The night
before he had read an extraordinary proclamation to the nation which said that the workers had left
the station and had returned home in peaceful groups. The proclamation also stated that the union
leaders, with great patriotic spirit, had reduced their demands to two points: a reform of medical
services and the building of latrines in the living quarters. It was stated later that when the military
authorities obtained the agreement with the workers, they hastened to tell Mr. Brown and he not
only accepted the new conditions but offered to pay for three days of public festivities to celebrate
the end of the conflict. Except that when the military asked him on what date they could announce
the signing of the agreement, he looked out the window at the sky crossed with lightning flashes and
made a profound gesture of doubt.

“When the rain stops,” he said. “As long as the rain lasts we’re suspending all activities.”

It had not rained for three months and there had been a drought. But when Mr. Brown
announced his decision a torrential downpour spread over the whole banana region. It was the one
that caught José Arcadio Segundo on his way to Macondo. A week later it was still raining. The
official version, repeated a thousand times and mangled out all over the country by every means of
communication the government found at hand, was finally accepted: there were no dead, the
satisfied workers had gone back to their families, and the banana company was suspending all
activity until the rains stopped. Martial law continued with an eye to the necessity of taking
emergency measures for the public disaster of the endless downpour, but the troops were confined
to quarters. During the day the soldiers walked through the torrents in the streets with their pant
legs rolled up, playing with boats with the children. At night after taps, they knocked doors down
with their rifle butts, hauled suspects out of their beds, and took them off on trips from which there
was no return. The search for and extermination of the hoodlums, murderers, arsonists, and rebels
of Decree No. 4 was still going on, but the military denied it even to the relatives of the victims who
crowded the commandant’s offices in search of news. “You must have been dreaming,” the officers


insisted. “Nothing has happened in Macondo, nothing has ever happened, and nothing ever will
happen. “This is a happy town.” In that way they were finally able to wipe out the union leaders.

The only survivor was José Arcadio Segundo. One February night the unmistakable blows of rifle
butts were heard at the door. Aureliano Segundo, who was still waiting for it to clear, opened the
door to six soldiers under the command of an officer. Soaking from the rain, without saying a word,
they searched the house room by room, closet by closet, from parlor to pantry. Úrsula woke up
when they turned on the light in her room and she did not breathe while the march went on but
held her fingers in the shape of a cross, pointing them to where the soldiers were moving about.
Santa Sofía de la Piedad managed to warn José Arcadio Segundo, who was sleeping in Melquíades’
room, but he could see that it was too late to try to escape. So Santa Sofía de la Piedad locked the
door again and he put on his shirt and his shoes and sat down on the cot to wait for them. At that
moment they were searching the gold workshop. The officer made them open the padlock and with
a quick sweep of his lantern he saw the workbench and the glass cupboard with bottles of acid and
instruments that were still where their owner had left them and he seemed to understand that no
one lived in that room. He wisely asked Aureliano Segundo if he was a silversmith, however, and the
latter explained to him that it had been Colonel Aureliano Buendía’s workshop. “Oho,” the officer
said, turned on the lights, and ordered such a minute search that they did not miss the eighteen little
gold fishes that had not been melted down and that were hidden behind the bottles Is their tin can.
The officer examined them one by one on the workbench and then he turned human. “I’d like to
take one, if I may,” he said. “At one time they were a mark of subversion, but now they’re relics.” -
He was young, almost an adolescent, with no sign of timidity and with a natural pleasant manner
that had not shown itself until then. Aureliano Segundo gave him the little fish. The officer put it in
his shirt pocket with a childlike glow in his eyes and he put the others back in the can and set it back
where it had been.

“It’s a wonderful memento,” he said. “Colonel Aureliano Buendía was one of our greatest men.”

Nevertheless, that surge of humanity did not alter his professional conduct. At Melquíades’ room,
which was locked up again with the padlock, Santa Sofía de la Piedad tried one last hope. “No one
has lived in that room for a century,” she said. The officer had it opened and flashed the beam of
the lantern over it, and Aureliano Segundo and Santa Sofía de la Piedad saw the Arab eyes of José
Arcadio Segundo at the moment when the ray of light passed over his face and they understood that
it was the end of one anxiety and the beginning of another which would find relief only in
resignation. But the officer continued examining the room with the lantern and showed no sign of
interest until he discovered the seventy-two chamberpots piled up in the cupboards. Then he turned
on the light. José Arcadio Segundo was sitting on the edge of the cot, ready to go, more solemn and
pensive than ever. In the background were the shelves with the shredded books, the rolls of
parchment, and the clean and orderly worktable with the ink still fresh in the inkwells. There was the
same pureness in the air, the same clarity, the same respite from dust and destruction that Aureliano
Segundo had known in childhood and that only Colonel Aureliano Buendía could not perceive. But
the officer was only interested in the chamberpots.

“How many people live in this house?’ he asked.

“Five.”

The officer obviously did not understand. He paused with his glance on the space where
Aureliano Segundo and Santa Soft de la Piedad were still seeing José Arcadio Segundo and the latter
also realized that the soldier was looking at him without seeing him. Then he turned out the light
and closed the door. When he spoke to the soldiers, Aureliano, Segundo understood that the young
officer had seen the room with the same eyes as Colonel Aureliano Buendía.

“It’s obvious that no one has been in that room for at least a hundred years.” the officer said to
the soldiers. “There must even be snakes in there.”


When the door closed, José Arcadio Segundo was sure that the war was over. Years before
Colonel Aureliano Buendía had spoken to him about the fascination of war and had tried to show it
to him with countless examples drawn from his own experience. He had believed him. But the night
when the soldiers looked at him without seeing him while he thought about the tension of the past
few months, the misery of jail, the panic at the station, and the train loaded with dead people, José
Arcadio Segundo reached the conclusion that Colonel Aureliano Buendía was nothing but a faker or
an imbecile. He could not understand why he had needed so many words to explain what he felt in
war because one was enough: fear. In Melquíades’ room, on the other hand, protected by the
supernatural light, by the sound of the rain, by the feeling of being invisible, he found the repose
that he had not had for one single instant during his previous life, and the only fear that remained
was that they would bury him alive. He told Santa Sofía de la Piedad about it when she brought him
his daily meals and she promised to struggle to stay alive even beyond her natural forces in order to
make sure that they would bury him dead. Free from all fear, José Arcadio Segundo dedicated
himself then to peruse the manuscripts of Melquíades many times, and with so much more pleasure
when he could not understand them. He became accustomed to the sound of the rain, which after
two months had become another form of silence, and the only thing that disturbed his solitude was
the coming and going of Santa Sofía de la Piedad. He asked her, therefore, to leave the meals on the
windowsill and padlock the door. The rest of the family forgot about him including Fernanda, who
did not mind leaving him there when she found that the soldiers had seen him without recognizing
him. After six months of enclosure, since the soldiers had left Macondo Aureliano Segundo
removed the padlock, looking for someone he could talk to until the rain stopped. As soon as he
opened the door he felt the pestilential attack of the chamberpots, which were placed on the floor
and all of which had been used several times. José Arcadio Segundo, devoured by baldness,
indifferent to the air that had been sharpened by the nauseating vapors, was still reading and
rereading the unintelligible parchments. He was illuminated by a seraphic glow. He scarcely raised
his eyes when he heard the door open, but that look was enough for his brother to see repeated in it
the irreparable fate of his great-grandfather.

“There were more than three thousand of them,” was all that José Arcadio Segundo said. “I’m
sure now that they were everybody who had been at the station.”


Chapter 16

IT RAINED FOR four years, eleven months, and two days. There were periods of drizzle during which
everyone put on his full dress and a convalescent look to celebrate the clearing, but the people soon
grew accustomed to interpret the pauses as a sign of redoubled rain. The sky crumbled into a set of
destructive storms and out of the north came hurricanes that scattered roofs about and knocked
down walls and uprooted every last plant of the banana groves. Just as during the insomnia plague,
as Úrsula came to remember during those days, the calamity itself inspired defenses against
boredom. Aureliano Segundo was one of those who worked hardest not to be conquered by
idleness. He had gone home for some minor matter on the night that Mr. Brown unleashed the
storm, and Fernanda tried to help him with a half-blown-out umbrella that she found in a closet. “I
don’t need it,” he said. “I’ll stay until it clears.” That was not, of course, an ironclad promise, but he
would accomplish it literally. Since his clothes were at Petra Cotes’s, every three days he would take
off what he had on and wait in his shorts until they washed. In order not to become bored, he
dedicated himself to the task of repairing the many things that needed fixing in the house. He
adjusted hinges, oiled locks, screwed knockers tight, and planed doorjambs. For several months he
was seen wandering about with a toolbox that the gypsies must have left behind in José Arcadio
Buendía’s days, and no one knew whether because of the involuntary exercise, the winter tedium or
the imposed abstinence, but his belly was deflating little by little like a wineskin and his face of a
beatific tortoise was becoming less bloodshot and his double chin less prominent until he became
less pachydermic all over and was able to tie his own shoes again. Watching him putting in latches
and repairing clocks, Fernanda wondered whether or not he too might be falling into the vice of
building so that he could take apart like Colonel Aureliano Buendía and his little gold fishes,
Amaranta and her shroud and her buttons, José Arcadio and the parchments, and Úrsula and her
memories. But that was not the case. The worst part was that the rain was affecting everything and
the driest of machines would have flowers popping out among their gears if they were not oiled
every three days, and the threads in brocades rusted, and wet clothing would break out in a rash of
saffron-colored moss. The air was so damp that fish could have come in through the doors and
swum out the windows, floating through the atmosphere in the rooms. One morning Úrsula woke
up feeling that she was reaching her end in a placid swoon and she had already asked them to take
her to Father Antonio Isabel, even if it had to be on a stretcher, when Santa Sofía de la Piedad
discovered that her back was paved with leeches. She took them off one by one, crushing them with
a firebrand before they bled her to death. It was necessary to dig canals to get the water out of the
house and rid it of the frogs and snails so that they could dry the floors and take the bricks from
under the bedposts and walk in shoes once more. Occupied with the many small details that called
for his attention, Aureliano Segundo did not realize that he was getting old until one afternoon when
he found himself contemplating the premature dusk from a rocking chair and thinking about Petra
Cotes without quivering. There would have been no problem in going back to Fernanda’s insipid
love, because her beauty had become solemn with age, but the rain had spared him from all
emergencies of passion and had filled him with the spongy serenity of a lack of appetite. He amused
himself thinking about the things that he could have done in other times with that rain which had
already lasted a year. He had been one of the first to bring zinc sheets to Macondo, much earlier
than their popularization by the banana company, simply to roof Petra Cotes’s bedroom with them
and to take pleasure in the feeling of deep intimacy that the sprinkling of the rain produced at that
time. But even those wild memories of his mad youth left him unmoved, just as during his last
debauch he had exhausted his quota of salaciousness and all he had left was the marvelous gift of


being able to remember it without bitterness or repentance. It might have been thought that the
deluge had given him the opportunity to sit and reflect and that the business of the pliers and the
oilcan had awakened in him the tardy yearning of so many useful trades that he might have followed
in his life and did not; but neither case was true, because the temptation of a sedentary domesticity
that was besieging him was not the result of any rediscovery or moral lesion. it came from much
farther off, unearthed by the rain’s pitchfork from the days when in Melquíades’ room he would
read the prodigious fables about flying carpets and whales that fed on entire ships and their crews. It
was during those days that in a moment of carelessness little Aureliano appeared on the porch and
his grandfather recognized the secret of his identity. He cut his hair, dressed him taught him not to
be afraid of people, and very soon it was evident that he was a legitimate Aureliano Buendía, with his
high cheekbones, his startled look, and his solitary air. It was a relief for Fernanda. For some time
she had measured the extent of her pridefulness, but she could not find any way to remedy it
because the more she thought of solutions the less rational they seemed to her. If she had known
that Aureliano Segundo was going to take things the way he did, with the fine pleasure of a
grandfather, she would not have taken so many turns or got so mixed up, but would have freed
herself from mortification the year before Amaranta Úrsula, who already had her second teeth,
thought of her nephew as a scurrying toy who was a consolation for the tedium of the rain.
Aureliano Segundo remembered then the English encyclopedia that no one had since touched in
Meme’s old room. He began to show the children the pictures, especially those of animals, and later
on the maps and photographs of remote countries and famous people. Since he did not know any
English and could identify only the most famous cities and people, he would invent names and
legends to satisfy the children’s insatiable curiosity.

Fernanda really believed that her husband was waiting for it to clear to return to his concubine.
During the first months of the rain she was afraid that he would try to slip into her bedroom and
that she would have to undergo the shame of revealing to him that she was incapable of
reconciliation since the birth of Amaranta Úrsula. That was the reason for her anxious correspon-
dence with the invisible doctors, interrupted by frequent disasters of the mail. During the first
months when it was learned that the trains were jumping their tracks in the rain, a letter from the
invisible doctors told her that hers were not arriving. Later on, when contact with the unknown
correspondents was broken, she had seriously thought of putting on the tiger mask that her husband
had worn in the bloody carnival and having herself examined under a fictitious name by the banana
company doctors. But one of the many people who regularly brought unpleasant news of the deluge
had told her that the company was dismantling its dispensaries to move them to where it was not
raining. Then she gave up hope. She resigned herself to waiting until the rain stopped and the mail
service was back to normal, and in the meantime she sought relief from her secret ailments with
recourse to her imagination, because she would rather have died than put herself in the hands of the
only doctor left in Macondo, the extravagant Frenchman who ate grass like a donkey. She drew close
to Úrsula, trusting that she would know of some palliative for her attacks. But her twisted habit of
not calling things by their names made her put first things last and use “expelled” for “gave birth”
and “burning” for “flow” so that it would all be less shameful, with the result that Úrsula reached
the reasonable conclusion that her trouble was intestinal rather than uterine, and she advised her to
take a dose of calomel on an empty stomach. If it had not been for that suffering, which would have
had nothing shameful about it for someone who did not suffer as well from shamefulness, and if it
had not been for the loss of the letters, the rain would not have bothered Fernanda, because, after
all, her whole life had been spent as if it had been raining. She did not change her schedule or
modify her ritual. When the table was still raised up on bricks and the chairs put on planks so that
those at the table would not get their feet wet, she still served with linen tablecloths and fine
chinaware and with lighted candles, because she felt that the calamities should not be used as a


pretext for any relaxation in customs. No one went out into the street any more. If it had depended
on Fernanda, they would never have done so, not only since it started raining but since long before
that, because she felt that doors had been invented to stay closed and that curiosity for what was
going on in the street was a matter for harlots. Yet she was the first one to look out when they were
told that the funeral procession for Colonel Gerineldo Márquez was passing by and even though she
only watched it through the half-opened window it left her in such a state of affliction that for a long
time she repented in her weakness.

She could not have conceived of a more desolate cortege. They had put the coffin in an oxcart
over which they built a canopy of banana leaves, but the pressure of the rain was so intense and the
streets so muddy that with every step the wheels got stuck and the covering was on the verge of
falling apart. The streams of sad water that fell on the coffin were soaking the flag that had been
placed on top which was actually the flag stained with blood and gunpowder that had been rejected
by more honorable veterans. On the coffin they had also placed the saber with tassels of silver and
copper, the same one that Colonel Gerineldo Márquez used to hang on the coat rack in order to go
into Amaranta’s sewing room unarmed. Behind the cart, some barefoot and all of them with their
pants rolled up, splashing in the mud were the last survivors of the surrender at Neerlandia carrying
a drover’s staff in one hand and in the other a wreath of paper flowers that had become discolored
in the rain. They appeared like an unreal vision along the street which still bore the name of Colonel
Aureliano Buendía and they all looked at the house as they passed and turned the corner at the
square, where they had to ask for help to move the cart, which was stuck. Úrsula had herself carried
to the door by Santa Sofía de la Piedad. She followed the difficulties of the procession with such
attention that no one doubted that she was seeing it, especially because her raised hand of an
archangelic messenger was moving with the swaying of the cart.

“Good-bye, Gerineldo, my son,” she shouted. “Say hello to my people and tell them I’ll see them
when it stops raining.”

Aureliano Segundo helped her back to bed and with the same informality with which he always
treated her, he asked her the meaning of her farewell.

“It’s true,” she said. “I’m only waiting for the rain to stop in order to die.”

The condition of the streets alarmed Aureliano Segundo. He finally became worried about the
state of his animals and he threw an oilcloth over his head and sent to Petra Cotes’s house. He
found her in the courtyard, in the water up to her waist, trying to float the corpse of a horse.
Aureliano Segundo helped her with a lever, and the enormous swollen body gave a turn like a bell
and was dragged away by the torrent of liquid mud. Since the rain began, all that Petra Cotes had
done was to clear her courtyard of dead animals. During the first weeks she sent messages to
Aureliano Segundo for him to take urgent measures and he had answered that there was no rush,
that the situation was not alarming, that there would be plenty of time to think about something
when it cleared. She sent him word that the horse pastures were being flooded, that the cattle were
fleeing to high ground, where there was nothing to eat and where they were at the mercy of jaguars
and sickness. “There’s nothing to be done,” Aureliano Segundo answered her. “Others will be born
when it clears.” Petra Cates had seen them die in dusters and the was able to butcher only those
stuck in the mud. She saw with quiet impotence how the deluge was pitilessly exterminating a
fortune that at one time was considered the largest and most solid in Macondo, and of which
nothing remained but pestilence. When Aureliano Segundo decided to go see what was going on, he
found only the corpse of the horse and a squalid mule in the ruins of the stable. Petra Cotes watched
him arrive without surprise, joy, or resentment, and she only allowed herself an ironic smile.

“It’s about time!” she said.

She had aged, all skin and bones, and her tapered eyes of a carnivorous animal had become sad
and tame from looking at the rain so much. Aureliano Segundo stayed at her house more than three


months, not because he felt better there than in that of his family, but because he needed all that
time to make the decision to throw the piece of oilcloth back over his head. “There’s no rush,” he
said, as he had said in the other home. “Let’s hope that it clears in the next few hours.” During the
course of the first week he became accustomed to the inroads that time and the rain had made in the
health of his concubine, and little by little he was seeing her as she had been before, remembering
her jubilant excesses and the delirious fertility that her love provoked in the animals, and partly
through love, partly through interest, one night during the second week he awoke her with urgent
caresses. Petra Cotes did not react. “Go back to sleep,” she murmured. “These aren’t times for
things like that.” Aureliano Segundo saw himself in the mirrors on the ceiling, saw Petra Cotes’s
spinal column like a row of spools strung together along a cluster of withered nerves, and he saw
that she was right, not because of the times but because of themselves, who were no longer up to
those things.

Aureliano Segundo returned home with his trunks, convinced that not only Úrsula but all the
inhabitants of Macondo were waiting for it to dear in order to die. He had seen them as he passed
by, sitting in their parlors with an absorbed look and folded arms, feeling unbroken time pass,
relentless times, because it was useless to divide it into months and years, and the days into hours,
when one could do nothing but contemplate the rain. The children greeted Aureliano Segundo with
excitement because he was playing the asthmatic accordion for them again. But the concerts did not
attract their attention as much as the sessions with the encyclopedia, and once more they got
together in Meme’s room, where Aureliano Segundo’s imagination changed a dirigible into a flying
elephant who was looking for a place to sleep among the clouds. On one occasion he came across a
man on horseback who in spite of his strange outfit had a familiar look, and after examining him
closely he came to the conclusion that it was a picture of Colonel Aureliano Buendía. He showed it
to Fernanda and she also admitted the resemblance of the horseman not only to the colonel but to
everybody in the family, although he was actually a Tartar warrior. Time passed in that way with the
Colossus of Rhodes and snake charmers until his wife told him that there were only three pounds of
dried meat and a sack of rice left in the pantry.

And what do you want me to do about it?” he asked.

“I don’t know,” Fernanda answered. “That’s men’s business.”

“Well,” Aureliano Segundo said, “something will be done when it clears.”

He was more interested in the encyclopedia than In the domestic problem, even when he had to
content himself with a scrap of meat and a little rice for lunch. “It’s impossible to do anything now,”
he would say. “It can’t rain for the rest of our lives.” And while the urgencies of the pantry grew
greater, Fernanda’s indignation also grew, until her eventual protests, her infrequent outbursts came
forth in an uncontained, unchained torrent that begin one morning like the monotonous drone of a
guitar and as the day advanced rose in pitch, richer and more splendid. Aureliano Segundo was not
aware of the singsong until the following day after breakfast when he felt himself being bothered by
a buzzing that was by then more fluid and louder than the sound of the rain, and it was Fernanda,
who was walking throughout the house complaining that they had raised her to be a queen only to
have her end up as a servant in a madhouse, with a lazy, idolatrous, libertine husband who lay on his
back waiting for bread to rain down from heaven while she was straining her kidneys trying to keep
afloat a home held together with pins where there was so much to do, so much to bear up under
and repair from the time God gave his morning sunlight until it was time to go to bed that when she
got there her eyes were full of ground glass, and yet no one ever said to her, “Good morning,
Fernanda, did you sleep well?” Nor had they asked her, even out of courtesy, why she was so pale or
why she awoke with purple rings under her eyes in spite of the fact that she expected it, of course,
from a family that had always considered her a nuisance, an old rag, a booby painted on the wall, and
who were always going around saying things against her behind her back, calling her church mouse,


calling her Pharisee, calling her crafty, and even Amaranta, may she rest in peace, had said aloud that
she was one of those people who could not tell their rectums from their ashes, God have mercy,
such words, and she had tolerated everything with resignation because of the Holy Father, but she
had not been able to tolerate it any more when that evil José Arcadio Segundo said that the
damnation of the family had come when it opened its doors to a stuck-up highlander, just imagine, a
bossy highlander, Lord save us, a highlander daughter of evil spit of the same stripe as the
highlanders the government sent to kill workers, you tell me, and he was referring to no one but her,
the godchild of the Duke of Alba, a lady of such lineage that she made the liver of presidents’ wives
quiver, a noble dame of fine blood like her, who had the right to sign eleven peninsular names and
who was the only mortal creature in that town full of bastards who did not feel all confused at the
sight of sixteen pieces of silverware, so that her adulterous husband could die of laughter afterward
and say that so many knives and forks and spoons were not meant for a human being but for a
centipede, and the only one who could tell with her eyes closed when the white wine was served and
on what side and in which glass and when the red wine and on what side and in which glass, and not
like that peasant of an Amaranta, may she rest in peace, who thought that white wine was served in
the daytime and red wine at night, and the only one on the whole coast who could take pride in the
fact that she took care of her bodily needs only in golden chamberpots, so that Colonel Aureliano
Buendía, may he rest in peace, could have the effrontery to ask her with his Masonic Ill humor
where she had received that privilege and whether she did not shit shit but shat sweet basil, just
imagine, with those very words, and so that Renata, her own daughter, who through an oversight
had seen her stool in the bedroom, had answered that even if the pot was all gold and with a coat of
arms, what was inside was pure shit, physical shit, and worse even than any other kind because it was
stuck-up highland shit, just imagine, her own daughter, so that she never had any illusions about the
rest of the family, but in any case she had the right to expect a little more consideration from her
husband because, for better or for worse, he was her consecrated spouse her helpmate, her legal
despoiler, who took upon himself of his own free and sovereign will the grave responsibility of
taking her away from her paternal home, where she never wanted for or suffered from anything,
where she wove funeral wreaths as a pastime, since her godfather had sent a letter with his signature
and the stamp of his ring on the sealing wax simply to say that the hands of his goddaughter were
not meant for tasks of this world except to play the clavichord, and, nevertheless, her insane
husband had taken her from her home with all manner of admonitions and warnings and had
brought her to that frying pan of hell where a person could not breathe because of the heat, and
before she had completed her Pentecostal fast he had gone off with his wandering trunks and his
wastrel’s accordion to loaf in adultery with a wretch of whom it was only enough to see her behind,
well, that’s been said, to see her wiggle her mare’s behind in order to guess that she was a, that she
was a, just the opposite of her, who was a lady in a palace or a pigsty, at the table or in bed, a lady of
breeding, God-fearing, obeying His laws and submissive to His wishes, and with whom he could not
perform, naturally, the acrobatics and trampish antics that he did with the other one, who, of course,
was ready for anything like the French matrons, and even worse, if one considers well, because they
at least had the honesty to put a red light at their door, swinishness like that, just imagine, and that
was all that was needed by the only and beloved daughter of Doña Renata Argote and Don
Fernando del Carpio, and especially the latter, an upright man, a fine Christian, a Knight of the
Order of the Holy Sepulcher, those who receive direct from God the privilege of remaining intact in
their graves with their skin smooth like the cheeks of a bride and their eyes alive and clear like
emeralds.

“That’s not true,” Aureliano Segundo interrupted her. “He was already beginning to smell when
they brought him here.”


He had the patience to listen to her for a whole day until he caught her in a slip. Fernanda did not
pay him any mind, but she lowered her voice. That night at dinner the exasperating buzzing of the
singsong had conquered the sound of the rain. Aureliano, Segundo ate very little, with his head
down, and he went to his room early. At breakfast on the following day Fernanda was trembling,
with a look of not having slept well, and she seemed completely exhausted by her rancor. Never-
theless, when her husband asked if it was not possible to have a soft-boiled egg, she did not answer
simply that they had run out of eggs the week before, but she worked up a violent diatribe against
men who spent their time contemplating their navels and then had the gall to ask for larks’ livers at
the table. Aureliano Segundo took the children to look at the encyclopedia, as always, and Fernanda
pretended to straighten out Meme’s room just so that he could listen to her muttering, of course,
that it certainly took cheek for him to tell the poor innocents that there was a picture of Colonel
Aureliano Buendía in the encyclopedia. During the afternoon, while the children were having their
nap, Aureliano Segundo sat on the porch and Fernanda pursued him even there, provoking him,
tormenting him, hovering about him with her implacable horsefly buzzing, saying that, of course,
while there was nothing to eat except stones, her husband was sitting there like a sultan of Persia,
watching it rain, because that was all he was, a slob, a sponge, a good-for-nothing, softer than cotton
batting, used to living off women and convinced that he had married Jonah’s wife, who was so
content with the story of the whale. Aureliano Segundo listened to her for more than two hours,
impassive, as if he were deaf. He did not interrupt her until late in the afternoon, when he could no
longer bear the echo of the bass drum that was tormenting his head.

“Please shut up,” he begged.

Fernanda, quite the contrary, raised her pitch. “I don’t have any reason to shut up,” she said.
“Anyone who doesn’t want to listen to me can go someplace else.” Then Aureliano Segundo lost
control. He stood up unhurriedly, as if he only intended to stretch, and with a perfectly regulated
and methodical fury he grabbed the pots with the begonias one after the other, those with the ferns,
the oregano, and one after the other he smashed them onto the floor. Fernanda was frightened
because until then she had really not had a clear indication of the tremendous inner force of her
singsong, but it was too late for any attempt at rectification. Intoxicated by the uncontained torrent
of relief, Aureliano Segundo broke the glass on the china closet and piece by piece, without hurrying,
he took out the chinaware and shattered it on the floor. Systematically, serenely, in the same
parsimonious way in which he had papered the house with banknotes, he then set about smashing
the Bohemian crystal ware against the walls, the hand-painted vases, the pictures of maidens in flow-
er-laden boats, the mirrors in their gilded frames, everything that was breakable, from parlor to
pantry, and he finished with the large earthen jar in the kitchen, which exploded in the middle of the
courtyard with a hollow boom. Then he washed his hands, threw the oilcloth over himself, and
before midnight he returned with a few strings of dried meat, several bags of rice, corn with weevils,
and some emaciated bunches of bananas. From then on there was no more lack of food.

Amaranta Úrsula and little Aureliano would remember the rains as a happy time. In spite of
Fernanda’s strictness, they would splash in the puddles in the courtyard, catch lizards and dissect
them, and pretend that they were poisoning the soup with dust from butterfly wings when Santa
Sofía de la Piedad was not looking Úrsula was their most amusing plaything. They looked upon her
as a big,. broken-down doll that they carried back and forth from one corner to another wrapped in
colored cloth and with her face painted with soot and annatto, and once they were on the point of
plucking out her eyes with the pruning shears as they had done with the frogs. Nothing gave them as
much excitement as the wanderings of her mind. Something, indeed, must have happened to her
mind during the third year of the rain, for she was gradually losing her sense of reality and confusing
present time with remote periods of her life to the point where, on one occasion, she spent three
days weeping deeply over the death of Petronila Iguarán, her great-grandmother, buried for over a


century. She sank into such an insane state of confusion that she thought little Aureliano was her
son the colonel during the time he was taken to see ice, and that the José Arcadio who was at that
time in the seminary was her firstborn who had gone off with the gypsies. She spoke so much about
the family that the children learned to make up imaginary visits with beings who had not only been
dead for a long time, but who had existed at different times. Sitting on the bed, her hair covered
with ashes and her face wrapped in a red kerchief, Úrsula was happy in the midst of the unreal
relatives whom the children described in all detail, as if they had really known them. Úrsula would
converse with her forebears about events that took place before her own existence, enjoying the
news they gave her, and she would weep with them over deaths that were much more recent than
the guests themselves. The children did not take long to notice that in the course of those ghostly
visits Úrsula would always ask a question destined to establish the one who had brought a life-size
plaster Saint Joseph to the house to be kept until the rains stopped. It was in that way that Aureliano
Segundo remembered the fortune buried in some place that only Úrsula knew, but the questions and
astute maneuvering that occurred to him were of no use because in the labyrinth of her madness she
seemed to preserve enough of a margin of lucidity to keep the secret which she would reveal only to
the one who could prove that he was the real owner of the buried gold. She was so skillful and strict
that when Aureliano Segundo instructed one of his carousing companions to pass himself off as the
owner of the fortune, she got him all caught up in a minute interrogation sown with subtle traps.

Convinced that Úrsula would carry the secret to her grave, Aureliano Segundo hired a crew of
diggers under the pretext that they were making some drainage canals in the courtyard and the
backyard, and he himself took soundings in the earth with iron bars and all manner of metal-
detectors without finding anything that resembled gold in three months of exhaustive exploration.
Later on he went to Pilar Ternera with the hope that the cards would we more than the diggers, but
she began by explaining that any attempt would be useless unless Úrsula cut the cards. On the other
hand, she confirmed the existence of the treasure with the precision of its consisting of seven
thousand two hundred fourteen coins buried in three canvas sacks reinforced with copper wire
within a circle with a radius of three hundred eighty-eight feet with Úrsula’s bed as the center, but
she warned that it would not be found until it stopped raining and the suns of three consecutive
Junes had changed the piles of mud into dust. The profusion and meticulous vagueness of the
information seemed to Aureliano Segundo so similar to the tales of spiritualists that he kept on with
his enterprise in spite of the fact that they were in August and they would have to wait at least three
years in order to satisfy the conditions of the prediction. The first thing that startled him, even
though it increased his confusion at the same time, was the fact that it was precisely three hundred
eighty-eight feet from Úrsula’s bed to the backyard wall. Fernanda feared that he was as crazy as his
twin brother when she saw him taking the measurements, and even more when he told the digging
crew to make the ditches three feet deeper. Overcome by an exploratory delirium comparable only
to that of his great-grandfather when he was searching for the route of inventions, Aureliano Segun-
do lost the last layers of fat that he had left and the old resemblance to his twin brother was
becoming accentuated again, not only because of his slim figure, but also because of the distant air
and the withdrawn attitude. He no longer bothered with the children. He ate at odd hours, muddled
from head to toe, and he did so in a corner in the kitchen, barely answering the occasional questions
asked by Santa Sofía de la Piedad. Seeing him work that way, as she had never dreamed him capable
of doing, Fernanda thought that his stubbornness was diligence, his greed abnegation, and his thick-
headedness perseverance, and her insides tightened with remorse over the virulence with which she
had attacked his idleness. But Aureliano Segundo was in no mood for merciful reconciliations at that
time. Sunk up to his neck in a morass of dead brandies and rotting flowers, he flung the dirt of the
garden all about after having finished with the courtyard and the backyard, and he excavated so
deeply under the foundations of the east wing of the house that one night they woke up in terror at


what seemed to be an earthquake, as much because of the trembling as the fearful underground
creaking. Three of the rooms were collapsing and a frightening crack had opened up from the porch
to Fernanda’s room. Aureliano Segundo did not give up the search because of that. Even when his
last hopes had been extinguished and the only thing that seemed to make any sense was what the
cards had predicted, he reinforced the jagged foundation, repaired the crack with mortar, and
continued on the side to the west. He was still there on the second week of the following June when
the rain began to abate and the clouds began to lift and it was obvious from one moment to the next
that it was going to clear. That was what happened. On Friday at two in the afternoon the world
lighted up with a crazy crimson sun as harsh as brick dust and almost as cool as water, and it did not
rain again for ten years.

Macondo was in ruins. In the swampy streets there were the remains of furniture, animal
skeletons covered with red lilies, the last memories of the hordes of newcomers who had fled
Macondo as wildly as they had arrived. The houses that had been built with such haste during the
banana fever had been abandoned. The banana company tore down its installations. All that
remained of the former wired-in city were the ruins. The wooden houses, the cool terraces for
breezy card-playing afternoons, seemed to have been blown away in an anticipation of the prophetic
wind that years later would wipe Macondo off the face of the earth. The only human trace left by
that voracious blast was a glove belonging to Patricia Brown in an automobile smothered in wild
pansies. The enchanted region explored by José Arcadio Buendía in the days of the founding, where
later on the banana plantations flourished, was a bog of rotting roots, on the horizon of which one
could manage to see the silent foam of the sea. Aureliano Segundo went through a crisis of affliction
on the first Sunday that he put on dry clothes and went out to renew his acquaintance with the
town. The survivors of the catastrophe, the same ones who had been living in Macondo before it
had been struck by the banana company hurricane, were sitting in the middle of the street enjoying
their first sunshine. They still had the green of the algae on their skin and the musty smell of a
corner that had been stamped on them by the rain, but in their hearts they seemed happy to have
recovered the town in which they had been born. The Street of the Turks was again what it had
been earlier, in the days when the Arabs with slippers and rings in their ears were going about the
world swapping knickknacks for macaws and had found in Macondo a good bend in the road where
they could find respite from their age-old lot as wanderers. Having crossed through to the other side
of the rain. the merchandise in the booths was falling apart, the cloths spread over the doors were
splotched with mold, the counters undermined by termites, the walls eaten away by dampness, but
the Arabs of the third generation were sitting in the same place and in the same position as their
fathers and grandfathers, taciturn, dauntless, invulnerable to time and disaster, as alive or as dead as
they had been after the insomnia plague and Colonel Aureliano Buendía’s thirty-two wars. Their
strength of spirit in the face of ruins of the gaming tables, the fritter stands, the shooting galleries,
and the alley where they interpreted dreams and predicted the future made Aureliano Segundo ask
them with his usual informality what mysterious resources they had relied upon so as not to have
gone awash in the storm, what the devil they had done so as not to drown, and one after the other,
from door to door, they returned a crafty smile and a dreamy look, and without any previous
consultation they all gave the answer:

“Swimming.”

Petra Cotes was perhaps the only native who had an Arab heart. She had seen the final
destruction of her stables, her barns dragged off by the storm. but she had managed to keep her
house standing. During the second year she had sent pressing messages to Aureliano Segundo and
he had answered that he did not know when he would go back to her house, but that in any case he
would bring along a box of gold coins to pave the bedroom floor with. At that time she had dug
deep into her heart, searching for the strength that would allow her to survive the misfortune, and


she had discovered a reflective and just rage with which she had sworn to restore the fortune
squandered by her lover and then wiped out by the deluge. It was such an unbreakable decision that
Aureliano Segundo went back to her house eight months after the last message and found her green
disheveled, with sunken eyelids and skin spangled with mange, but she was writing out numbers on
small pieces of paper to make a raffle. Aureliano Segundo was astonished, and he was so dirty and
so solemn that Petra Cotes almost believed that the one who had come to see her was not the lover
of all her life but his twin brother.

“You’re crazy,” he told her. “Unless you plan to raffle off bones.”

Then she told him to look in the bedroom and Aureliano Segundo saw the mule. Its skin was
clinging to its bones like that of its mistress, but it was just as alive and resolute as she. Petra Cotes
had fed it with her wrath, and when there was no more hay or corn or roots, she had given it shelter
in her own bedroom and fed it on the percale sheets, the Persian rugs, the plush bedspreads, the
velvet drapes, and the canopy embroidered with gold thread and silk tassels on the episcopal bed.


Chapter 17

ÚRSULA HAD to make a great effort to fulfill her promise to die when it cleared. The waves of
lucidity that were so scarce during the rains became more frequent after August, when an and wind
began to blow and suffocated the rose bushes and petrified the piles of mud, and ended up
scattering over Macondo the burning dust that covered the rusted zinc roofs and the age-old almond
trees forever. Úrsula cried in lamentation when she discovered that for more than three years she
had been a plaything for the children. She washed her painted face, took off the strips of brightly
colored cloth, the dried lizards and frogs, and the rosaries and old Arab necklaces that they had hung
all over her body, and for the first time since the death of Amaranta she got up out of bed without
anybody’s help to join in the family life once more. The spirit of her invincible heart guided her
through the shadows. Those who noticed her stumbling and who bumped into the archangelic arm
she kept raised at head level thought that she was having trouble with her body, but they still did not
think she was blind. She did not need to see to realize that the flower beds, cultivated with such care
since the first rebuilding, had been destroyed by the rain and ruined by Aureliano Segundo’s
excavations, and that the walls and the cement of the floors were cracked, the furniture mushy and
discolored, the doors off their hinges, and the family menaced by a spirit of resignation and despair
that was inconceivable in her time. Feeling her way along through the empty bedrooms she
perceived the continuous rumble of the termites as they carved the wood, the snipping of the moths
in the clothes closets, and the devastating noise of the enormous red ants that had prospered during
the deluge and were undermining the foundations of the house. One day she opened the trunk with
the saints and had to ask Santa Sofía de la Piedad to get off her body the cockroaches that jumped
out and that had already turned the clothing to dust. “A person can’t live in neglect like this,” she
said. “If we go on like this we’ll be devoured by animals.” From then on she did not have a moment
of repose. Up before dawn, she would use anybody available, even the children. She put the few
articles of clothing that were still usable out into the sun, she drove the cockroaches off with
powerful insecticide attacks, she scratched out the veins that the termites had made on doors and
windows and asphyxiated the ants in their anthills with quicklime. The fever of restoration finally
brought her to the forgotten rooms. She cleared out the rubble and cobwebs in the room where José
Arcadio Buendía had lost his wits looking for the Philosopher’s stone, she put the silver shop which
had been upset by the soldiers in order, and lastly she asked for the keys to Melquíades’ room to see
what state it was in. Faithful to the wishes of José Arcadio Segundo, who had forbidden anyone to
come in unless there was a clear indication that he had died, Santa Sofía de la Piedad tried all kinds
of subterfuges to throw Úrsula off the track. But so inflexible was her determination not to
surrender even the most remote corner of the house to the insects that she knocked down every
obstacle in her path, and after three days of insistence she succeeded in getting them to open the
door for her. She had to hold on to the doorjamb so that the stench would not knock her over, but
she needed only two seconds to remember that the schoolgirls’ seventy-two chamberpots were in
there and that on one of the rainy nights a patrol of soldiers had searched the house looking for José
Arcadio Segundo and had been unable to find him.

“Lord save us!” she exclaimed, as if she could see everything. “So much trouble teaching you
good manners and you end up living like a pig.”

José Arcadio Segundo was still reading over the parchments. The only thing visible in the
intricate tangle of hair was the teeth striped with green dime and his motionless eyes. When he
recognized his great-grandmother’s voice he turned his head toward the door, tried to smile, and
without knowing it repeated an old phrase of Úrsula’s.


“What did you expect?” he murmured. “Time passes.”

“That’s how it goes,” Úrsula said, “but not so much.”

When she said it she realized that she was giving the same reply that Colonel Aureliano Buendía
had given in his death cell, and once again she shuddered with the evidence that time was not
passing, as she had just admitted, but that it was turning in a circle. But even then she did not give
resignation a chance. She scolded José Arcadio Segundo as if he were a child and insisted that he
take a bath and shave and lend a hand in fixing up the house. The simple idea of abandoning the
room that had given him peace terrified José Arcadio Segundo. He shouted that there was no
human power capable of making him go out because he did not want to see the train with two
hundred cars loaded with dead people which left Macondo every day at dusk on its way to the sea.
“They were all of those who were at the station,” he shouted. “Three thousand four hundred eight.”
Only then did Úrsula realize that he was in a world of shadows more impenetrable than hers, as un-
reachable and solitary as that of his great-grandfather. She left him in the room, but she succeeded in
getting them to leave the padlock off, clean it every day, throw the chamberpots away except for
one, and to keep José Arcadio Segundo as clean and presentable as his great-grandfather had been
during his long captivity under the chestnut tree. At first Fernanda interpreted that bustle as an
attack of senile madness and it was difficult for her to suppress her exasperation. But about that time
José Arcadio told her that he planned to come to Macondo from Rome before taking his final vows,
and the good news filled her with such enthusiasm that from morning to night she would be seen
watering the flowers four times a day so that her son would not have a bad impression of the house.
It was that same incentive which induced her to speed up her correspondence with the invisible
doctors and to replace the pots of ferns and oregano and the begonias on the porch even before
Úrsula found out that they had been destroyed by Aureliano Segundo’s exterminating fury. Later on
she sold the silver service and bought ceramic dishes, pewter bowls and soup spoons, and alpaca
tablecloths, and with them brought poverty to the cupboards that had been accustomed to India
Company chinaware and Bohemian crystal. Úrsula always tried to go a step beyond. “Open the
windows and the doors,” she shouted. “Cook some meat and fish, buy the largest turtles around, let
strangers come and spread their mats in the corners and urinate in the rose bushes and sit down to
eat as many times as they want and belch and rant and muddy everything with their boots, and let
them do whatever they want to us, because that’s the only way to drive off rain.” But it was a vain
illusion. She was too old then and living on borrowed time to repeat the miracle of the little candy
animals, and none of her descendants had inherited her strength. The house stayed closed on
Fernanda’s orders.

Aureliano Segundo, who had taken his trunks back to the house of Petra Cotes, barely had
enough means to see that the family did not starve to death. With the raffling of the mule, Petra
Cotes and he bought some more animals with which they managed to set up a primitive lottery
business. Aureliano Segundo would go from house to house selling the tickets that he himself
painted with colored ink to make them more attractive and convincing, and perhaps he did not
realize that many people bought them out of gratitude and most of them out of pity. Nevertheless,
even the most pitying purchaser was getting a chance to win a pig for twenty cents or a calf for
thirty-two, and they became so hopeful that on Tuesday nights Petra Cotes’s courtyard overflowed
with people waiting for the moment when a child picked at random drew the winning number from
a bag. It did not take long to become a weekly fair, for at dusk food and drink stands would be set
up in the courtyard and many of those who were favored would slaughter the animals they had won
right there on the condition that someone else supply the liquor and music, so that without having
wanted to, Aureliano Segundo suddenly found himself playing the accordion again and participating
in modest tourneys of voracity. Those humble replicas of the revelry of former times served to show
Aureliano Segundo himself how much his spirits had declined and to what a degree his skill as a


masterful carouser had dried up. He was a changed man. The two hundred forty pounds that he had
attained during the days when he had been challenged by The Elephant had been reduced to one
hundred fifty-six; the glowing and bloated tortoise face had turned into that of an iguana, and he was
always on the verge of boredom and fatigue. For Petra Cotes, however, he had never been a better
man than at that time, perhaps because the pity that he inspired was mixed with love, and because of
the feeling of solidarity that misery aroused in both of them. The broken-down bed ceased to be the
scene of wild activities and was changed into an intimate refuge. Freed of the repetitious mirrors,
which had been auctioned off to buy animals for the lottery, and from the lewd damasks and velvets,
which the mule had eaten, they would stay up very late with the innocence of two sleepless
grandparents, taking advantage of the time to draw up accounts and put away pennies which they
formerly wasted just for the sake of it. Sometimes the cock’s crow would find them piling and
unpiling coins, taking a bit away from here to put there, to that this bunch would be enough to keep
Fernanda happy and that would be for Amaranta Úrsula’s shoes, and that other one for Santa Sofía
de la Piedad, who had not had a new dress since the time of all the noise, and this to order the coffin
if Úrsula died, and this for the coffee which was going up a cent a pound in price every three
months, and this for the sugar which sweetened less every day, and this for the lumber which was
still wet from the rains, and this other one for the paper and the colored ink to make tickets with,
and what was left over to pay off the winner of the April calf whose hide they had miraculously
saved when it came down with a symptomatic carbuncle just when all of the numbers in the raffle
had already been sold. Those rites of poverty were so pure that they nearly always set aside the
largest share for Fernanda, and they did not do so out of remorse or charity, but because her well-
being was more important to them than their own. What was really happening to them, although
neither of them realized it, was that they both thought of Fernanda as the daughter that they would
have liked to have and never did, to the point where on a certain occasion they resigned themselves
to eating crumbs for three days, so that she could buy a Dutch tablecloth. Nevertheless, no matter
how much they killed themselves with work, no matter how much money they eked out, and no
matter how many schemes they thought of, their guardian angels were asleep with fatigue while they
put in coins and took them out trying to get just enough to live with. During the waking hours when
the accounts were bad. they wondered what had happened in the world for the animals not to breed
with the same drive as before, why money slipped through their fingers, and why people who a short
time before had burned rolls of bills in the carousing considered it highway robbery to charge twelve
cents for a raffle of six hens. Aureliano Segundo thought without saying so that the evil was not in
the world but in some hidden place in the mysterious heart of Petra Cotes, where something had
happened during the deluge that had turned the animals sterile and made money scarce. Intrigued by
that enigma, he dug so deeply into her sentiments that in search of interest he found love, because
by trying to make her love him he ended up falling in love with her. Petra Cotes, for her part, loved
him more and more as she felt his love increasing, and that was how in the ripeness of autumn she
began to believe once more in the youthful superstition that poverty was the servitude of love. Both
looked back then on the wild revelry, the gaudy wealth, and the unbridled fornication as an
annoyance and they lamented that it had cost them so much of their lives to fund the paradise of
shared solitude. Madly in love after so many years of sterile complicity, they enjoyed the miracle of
loving each other as much at the table as in bed, and they grew to be so happy that even when they
were two worn-out old people they kept on blooming like little children and playing together like
dogs.

The raffles never got very far. At first Aureliano Segundo would spend three days of the week
shut up in what had been his rancher’s office drawing ticket after ticket, Painting with a fair skill a
red cow, a green pig, or a group of blue hens, according to the animal being raffled, and he would
sketch out a good imitation of printed numbers and the name that Petra Cotes thought good to call


the business: Divine Providence Raffles. But with time he felt so tired after drawing up to two thousand
tickets a week that he had the animals, the name, and the numbers put on rubber stamps, and then
the work was reduced to moistening them on pads of different colors. In his last years it occurred to
him to substitute riddles for the numbers so that the prize could be shared by all of those who
guessed it, but the system turned out to be so complicated and was open to so much suspicion that
he gave it up after the second attempt.

Aureliano Segundo was so busy trying to maintain the prestige of his raffles that he barely had
time to see the children. Fernanda put Amaranta Úrsula in a small private school where they
admitted only six girls, but she refused to allow Aureliano to go to public school. She considered
that she had already relented too much in letting him leave the room. Besides, the schools in those
days accepted only the legitimate offspring of Catholic marriages and on the birth certificate that had
been pinned to Aureliano’s clothing when they brought him to the house he was registered as a
foundling. So he remained shut In at the mercy of Santa Sofía de la Piedad’s loving eyes and Úrsula’s
mental quirks, learning in the narrow world of the house whatever his grandmothers explained to
him. He was delicate, thin, with a curiosity that unnerved the adults, but unlike the inquisitive and
sometimes clairvoyant look that the colonel had at his age, his look was blinking and somewhat
distracted. While Amaranta Úrsula was in kindergarten, he would hunt earthworms and torture
insects in the garden. But once when Fernanda caught him putting scorpions in a box to put in
Úrsula’s bed, she locked him up in Meme’s old room, where he spent his solitary hours looking
through the pictures in the encyclopedia. Úrsula found him there one afternoon when she was going
about sprinkling the house with distilled water and a bunch of nettles, and in spite of the fact that
she had been with him many times she asked him who he was.

“I’m Aureliano Buendía,” he said.

“That’s right” she replied. “And now it’s time for you to start learning how to be a silversmith.”

She had confused him with her son again, because the hot wind that came after the deluge and
had brought occasional waves of lucidity to Úrsula’s brain had passed. She never got her reason
back. When she went into the bedroom she found Petronila Iguarán there with the bothersome
crinolines and the beaded jacket that she put on for formal visits, and she found Tranquilina Maria
Miniata Alacoque Buendía, her grandmother, fanning herself with a peacock feather in her invalid’s
rocking chair, and her great-grandfather Aureliano Arcadio Buendía, with his imitation dolman of
the viceregal guard, and Aureliano Iguarán, her father, who had invented a prayer to make the
worms shrivel up and drop off cows, and her timid mother, and her cousin with the pig’s tail, and
José Arcadio Buendía, and her dead sons, all sitting in chairs lined up against the wall as if it were a
wake and not a visit. She was tying a colorful string of chatter together, commenting on things from
many separate places and many different times, so that when Amaranta Úrsula returned from school
and Aureliano grew tired of the encyclopedia, they would find her sitting on her bed, talking to
herself and lost in a labyrinth of dead people. “Fire!” she shouted once in terror and for an instant
panic spread through the house, but what she was telling about was the burning of a barn that she
had witnessed when she was four years old. She finally mixed up the past with the present in such a
way that in the two or three waves of lucidity that she had before she died, no one knew for certain
whether she was speaking about what she felt or what she remembered. Little by little she was
shrinking, turning into a fetus, becoming mummified in life to the point that in her last months she
was a cherry raisin lost inside of her nightgown, and the arm that she always kept raised looked like
the paw of a marimonda monkey. She was motionless for several days, and Santa Sofía de la Piedad
had to shake her to convince herself that she was alive and sat her on her lap to feed her a few
spoonfuls of sugar water. She looked like a newborn old woman. Amaranta Úrsula and Aureliano
would take her in and out of the bedroom, they would lay her on the altar to see if she was any
larger than the Christ child, and one afternoon they hid her in a closet in the Pantry where the rats


could have eaten her. One Palm Sunday they went into the bedroom while Fernanda was in church
and carried Úrsula out by the neck and ankles.

“Poor great-great-grandmother,” Amaranta Úrsula said. “She died of old age.”

Úrsula was startled.

“I’m alive!” she said.

“You can see.” Amaranta Úrsula said, suppressing her laughter, “that she’s not even breathing.”

“I’m talking!” Úrsula shouted.

“She can’t even talk,” Aureliano said. “She died like a little cricket.”

Then Úrsula gave in to the evidence. “My God,” she exclaimed in a low voice. “So this is what
it’s like to be dead.” She started an endless, stumbling, deep prayer that lasted more than two days,
and that by Tuesday had degenerated into a hodgepodge of requests to God and bits of practical
advice to stop the red ants from bringing the house down, to keep the lamp burning by Remedios’
daguerreotype, and never to let any Buendía marry a person of the same blood because their
children would be born with the tail of a pig. Aureliano Segundo tried to take advantage of her
delirium to get her to ten him where the gold was buried, but his entreaties were useless once more
“When the owner appears,” Úrsula said, “God will illuminate him so that he will find it.” Santa Sofía
de la Piedad had the certainty that they would find her dead from one moment to the next, because
she noticed during those days a certain confusion in nature: the roses smelled like goosefoot, a pod
of chick peas fell down and the beans lay on the ground in a perfect geometrical pattern in the shape
of a starfish and one night she saw a row of luminous orange disks pass across the sky.

They found her dead on the morning of Good Friday. The last time that they had helped her
calculate her age, during the time of the banana company, she had estimated it as between one
hundred fifteen and one hundred twenty-two. They buried her in a coffin that was not much larger
than the basket in which Aureliano had arrived, and very few people were at the funeral, partly
because there wet not many left who remembered her, and partly because it was so hot that noon
that the birds in their confusion were running into walls like day pigeons and breaking through
screens to die in the bedrooms.

At first they thought it was a plague. Housewives were exhausted from sweeping away so many
dead birds, especially at siesta time, and the men dumped them into the river by the cartload. On
Easter Sunday the hundred-year-old Father Antonio Isabel stated from the pulpit that the death of
the birds was due to the evil influence of the Wandering Jew, whom he himself had seen the night
before. He described him as a cross between a billy goat and a female heretic, an infernal beast
whose breath scorched the air and whose look brought on the birth of monsters in newlywed
women. There were not many who paid attention to his apocalyptic talk, for the town was
convinced that the priest was rambling because of his age. But one woman woke everybody up at
dawn on Wednesday because she found the tracks of a biped with a cloven hoof. They were so clear
and unmistakable that those who went to look at them had no doubt about the existence of a
fearsome creature similar to the one described by the parish priest and they got together to set traps
in their courtyards. That was how they managed to capture it. Two weeks after Úrsula’s death, Petra
Cotes and Aureliano Segundo woke up frightened by the especially loud bellowing of a calf that was
coming from nearby. When they got there a group of men were already pulling the monster off the
sharpened stakes they had set in the bottom of a pit covered with dry leaves, and it stopped lowing.
It was as heavy as an ox in spite of the fact that it was no taller than a young steer, and a green and
greasy liquid flowed from its wounds. Its body was covered with rough hair, plagued with small
ticks, and the skin was hardened with the scales of a remora fish, but unlike the priest’s description,
its human parts were more like those of a sickly angel than of a man, for its hands were tense and
agile, its eyes large and gloomy, and on its shoulder blades it had the scarred-over and calloused
stumps of powerful wings which must have been chopped off by a woodsman’s ax. They hung it to


an almond tree in the square by its ankles so that everyone could see it, and when it began to rot
they burned it in a bonfire, for they could not determine whether its bastard nature was that of an
animal to be thrown into the river or a human being to be buried. It was never established whether
it had really caused the death of the birds, but the newly married women did not bear the predicted
monsters, nor did the intensity of the heat decrease.

Rebeca died at the end of that year. Argénida, her lifelong servant, asked the authorities for help
to knock down the door to the bedroom where her mistress had been locked in for three days, and
they found her, on her solitary bed, curled up like a shrimp, with her head bald from ringworm and
her finger in her mouth. Aureliano Segundo took charge of the funeral and tried to restore the house
in order to sell it, but the destruction was so far advanced in it that the walls became scaly as soon as
they were painted and there was not enough mortar to stop the weeds from cracking the floors and
the ivy from rotting the beams.

That was how everything went after the deluge. The indolence of the people was in contrast to
the voracity of oblivion, which little by little was undermining memories in a pitiless way, to such an
extreme that at that time, on another anniversary of the Treaty of Neerlandia, some emissaries from
the president of the republic arrived in Macondo to award at last the decoration rejected several
times by Colonel Aureliano Buendía, and they spent a whole afternoon looking for someone who
could tell them where they could find one of his descendants. Aureliano Segundo was tempted to
accept it, thinking that it was a medal of solid gold, but Petra Cotes convinced him that it was not
proper when the emissaries already had some proclamations and speeches ready for the ceremony. It
was also around that time that the gypsies returned, the last heirs to Melquíades’ science, and they
found the town so defeated and its inhabitants so removed from the rest of the world that once
more they went through the houses dragging magnetized ingots as if that really were the Babylonian
wise men’s latest discovery, and once again they concentrated the sun’s rays with the giant
magnifying glass, and there was no lack of people standing open-mouthed watching kettles fall and
pots roll and who paid fifty cents to be startled as a gypsy woman put in her false teeth and took
them out again. A broken-down yellow train that neither brought anyone in nor took anyone out
and that scarcely paused at the deserted station was the only thing that was left of the long train to
which Mr. Brown would couple his glass-topped coach with the episcopal lounging chairs and of the
fruit trains with one hundred twenty cars which took a whole afternoon to pass by. The ecclesiastical
delegates who had come to investigate the report of the strange death of the birds and the sacrifice
of the Wandering Jew found Father Antonio Isabel playing blind man’s buff with the children, and
thinking that his report was the product of a hallucination, they took him off to an asylum. A short
time later they sent Father Augusto Angel, a crusader of the new breed, intransigent, audacious,
daring, who personally rang the bells several times a day so that the peoples spirits would not get
drowsy, and who went from house to house waking up the sleepers to go to mass but before a year
was out he too was conquered by the negligence that one breathed in with the air, by the hot dust
that made everything old and clogged up, and by the drowsiness caused by lunchtime meatballs in
the unbearable heat of siesta time.

With Úrsula’s death the house again fell into a neglect from which it could not be rescued even
by a will as resolute and vigorous as that of Amaranta Úrsula, who many years later, being a happy,
modern woman without prejudices, with her feet on the ground, opened doors and windows in
order to drive away the rain, restored the garden, exterminated the red ants who were already
walking across the porch in broad daylight, and tried in vain to reawaken the forgotten spirit of
hospitality. Fernanda’s cloistered passion built in impenetrable dike against Úrsula’s torrential
hundred years. Not only did she refuse to open doors when the arid wind passed through, but she
had the windows nailed shut with boards in the shape of a cross, obeying the paternal order of being
buried alive. The expensive correspondence with the invisible doctors ended in failure. After


numerous postponements, she shut herself up in her room on the date and hour agreed upon,
covered only by a white sheet and with her head pointed north, and at one o’clock in the morning
she felt that they were covering her head with a handkerchief soaked in a glacial liquid. When she
woke up the sun was shining in the window and she had a barbarous stitch in the shape of an arc
that began at her crotch and ended at her sternum. But before she could complete the prescribed
rest she received a disturbed letter from the invisible doctors, who mid they had inspected her for
six hours without finding anything that corresponded to the symptoms so many times and so
scrupulously described by her. Actually, her pernicious habit of not calling things by their names had
brought about a new confusion, for the only thing that the telepathic surgeons had found was a drop
in the uterus which could be corrected by the use of a pessary. The disillusioned Fernanda tried to
obtain more precise information, but the unknown correspondents did not answer her letters any
more. She felt so defeated by the weight of an unknown word that she decided to put shame behind
her and ask what a pessary was, and only then did she discover that the French doctor had hanged
himself to a beam three months earlier and had been buried against the wishes of the townspeople
by a former companion in arms of Colonel Aureliano Buendía. Then she confided in her son José
Arcadio and the latter sent her the pessaries from Rome along with a pamphlet explaining their use,
which she flushed down the toilet after committing it to memory so that no one would learn the
nature of her troubles. It was a useless precaution because the only people who lived in the house
scarcely paid any attention to her. Santa Sofía de la Piedad was wandering about in her solitary old
age, cooking the little that they ate and almost completely dedicated to the care of José Arcadio
Segundo. Amaranta Úrsula, who had inherited certain attractions of Remedios the Beauty, spent the
time that she had formerly wasted tormenting Úrsula at her schoolwork, and she began to show
good judgment and a dedication to study that brought back to Aureliano Segundo the high hopes
that Meme had inspired in him. He had promised her to send her to finish her studies in Brussels, in
accord with a custom established during the time of the banana company, and that illusion had
brought him to attempt to revive the lands devastated by the deluge. The few times that he appeared
at the house were for Amaranta Úrsula, because with time he had become a stranger to Fernanda
and little Aureliano was becoming withdrawn as he approached puberty. Aureliano Segundo had
faith that Fernanda’s heart would soften with old age so that the child could join in the life of the
town where no one certainly would make any effort to speculate suspiciously about his origins. But
Aureliano himself seemed to prefer the cloister of solitude and he did not show the least desire to
know the world that began at the street door of the house. When Úrsula had the door of
Melquíades’ room opened he began to linger about it, peeping through the half-opened door, and no
one knew at what moment he became close to José Arcadio Segundo in a link of mutual affection.
Aureliano Segundo discovered that friendship a long time after it had begun, when he heard the
child talking about the killing at the station. It happened once when someone at the table
complained about the ruin into which the town had sunk when the banana company had abandoned
it, and Aureliano contradicted him with maturity and with the vision of a grown person. His point of
view, contrary to the general interpretation, was that Macondo had been a prosperous place and well
on its way until it was disordered and corrupted and suppressed by the banana company, whose
engineers brought on the deluge as a pretext to avoid promises made to the workers. Speaking with
such good sense that to Fernanda he was like a sacrilegious parody of Jews among the wise men, the
child described with precise and convincing details how the army had machine-gunned more than
three thousand workers penned up by the station and how they loaded the bodies onto a two-
hundred-car train and threw them into the sea. Convinced as most people were by the official
version that nothing had happened, Fernanda was scandalized with the idea that the child had
inherited the anarchist ideas of Colonel Aureliano Buendía and told him to be quiet. Aureliano
Segundo, on the other hand, recognized his twin brother’s version. Actually, in spite of the fact that


everyone considered him mad, José Arcadio Segundo was at that time the most lucid inhabitant of
the house. He taught little Aureliano how to read and write, initiated him in the study of the
parchments, and he inculcated him with such a personal interpretation of what the banana company
had meant to Macondo that many years later, when Aureliano became part of the world, one would
have thought that he was telling a hallucinated version, because it was radically opposed to the false
one that historians had created and consecrated in the schoolbooks. In the small isolated room
where the arid air never penetrated, nor the dust, nor the heat, both had the atavistic vision of an old
man, his back to the window, wearing a hat with a brim like the wings of a crow who spoke about
the world many years before they had been born. Both described at the same time how it was always
March there and always Monday, and then they understood that José Arcadio Buendía was not as
crazy as the family said, but that he was the only one who had enough lucidity to sense the truth of
the fact that time also stumbled and had accidents and could therefore splinter and leave an
eternalized fragment in a room. José Arcadio Segundo had managed, furthermore, to classify the
cryptic letters of the parchments. He was certain that they corresponded to an alphabet of forty-
seven to fifty-three characters, which when separated looked like scratching and scribbling, and
which in the fine hand of Melquíades looked like pieces of clothing put out to dry on a line.
Aureliano remembered having seen a similar table in the English encyclopedia, so he brought it to
the room to compare it with that of José Arcadio Segundo. They were indeed the same.

Around the time of the riddle lottery, Aureliano Segundo began waking up with a knot in his
throat, as if he were repressing a desire to weep. Petra Cotes interpreted it as one more of so many
upsets brought on by the bad situation, and every morning for over a year she would touch his
palate with a dash of honey and give him some radish syrup. When the knot in his throat became so
oppressive that it was difficult for him to breathe, Aureliano Segundo visited Pilar Ternera to see if
she knew of some herb that would give him relief. The dauntless grandmother, who had reached a
hundred years of age managing a small, clandestine brothel, did not trust therapeutic superstitions,
so she turned the matter over to her cards. She saw the queen of diamonds with her throat wounded
by the steel of the jack of spades, and she deduced that Fernanda was trying to get her husband back
home by means of the discredited method of sticking pins into his picture but that she had brought
on an internal tumor because of her clumsy knowledge of the black arts. Since Aureliano Segundo
had no other pictures except those of his wedding and the copies were all in the family album, he
kept searching all through the house when his wife was not looking, and finally, in the bottom of the
dresser, he came across a half-dozen pessaries in their original boxes. Thinking that the small red
rubber rings were objects of witchcraft he put them in his pocket so that Pilar Ternera could have a
look at them. She could not determine their nature, but they looked so suspicious to her that in any
case she burned them in a bonfire she built in the courtyard. In order to conjure away Fernanda’s
alleged curse, she told Aureliano Segundo that he should soak a broody hen and bury her alive under
the chestnut tree, and he did it with such good faith that when he finished hiding the turned-up
earth with dried leaves he already felt that he was breathing better. For her part, Fernanda
interpreted the disappearance as a reprisal by the invisible doctors and she sewed a pocket of casing
to the inside of her camisole where she kept the new pessaries that her son sent her.

Six months after he had buried the hen, Aureliano Segundo woke up at midnight with an attack
of coughing and the feeling that he was being strangled within by the claws of a crab. It was then
that he understood that for all of the magical pessaries that he destroyed and all the conjuring hens
that he soaked, the single and sad piece of truth was that he was dying. He did not tell anyone.
Tormented by the fear of dying without having sent Amaranta Úrsula to Brussels, he worked as he
had never done, and instead of one he made three weekly raffles. From very early in the morning he
could be seen going through the town, even in the most outlying and miserable sections, trying to
sell tickets with an anxiety that could only be conceivable in a dying man. “Here’s Divine


Providence,” he hawked. “Don’t let it get away, because it only comes every hundred years.” He
made pitiful efforts to appear gay, pleasant, talkative, but it was enough to see his sweat and paleness
to know that his heart was not in it. Sometimes he would go to vacant lots, where no one could see
him, and sit down to rest from the claws that were tearing him apart inside. Even at midnight he
would be in the red-light district trying to console with predictions of good luck the lonely women
who were weeping beside their phonographs. “This number hasn’t come up in four months,” he
told them, showing them the tickets. “Don’t let it get away, life is shorter than you think.” They
finally lost respect for him, made fun of him, and in his last months they no longer called him Don
Aureliano, as they had always done, but they called him Mr. Divine Providence right to his face. His
voice was becoming filled with wrong notes. It was getting out of tune, and it finally diminished into
the growl of a dog, but he still had the drive to see that there should be no diminishing of the hope
people brought to Petra Cates’s courtyard. As he lost his voice, however, and realized that in a short
time he would be unable to bear the pain, he began to understand that it was not through raffled
pigs and goats that his daughter would get to Brussels, so he conceived the idea of organizing the
fabulous raffle of the lands destroyed by the deluge, which could easily be restored by a person with
the money to do so. It was such a spectacular undertaking that the mayor himself lent his aid by
announcing it in a proclamation, and associations were formed to buy tickets at one hundred pesos
apiece and they were sold out in less than a week. The night of the raffle the winners held a huge
celebration, comparable only to those of the good days of the banana company, and Aureliano
Segundo, for the last time, played the forgotten songs of Francisco the Man on the accordion, but
he could no longer sing them.

Two months later Amaranta Úrsula went to Brussels. Aureliano Segundo gave her not only the
money from the special raffle, but also what he had managed to put aside over the previous months
and what little he had received from the sale of the pianola, the clavichord, and other junk that had
fallen into disrepair. According to his calculations, that sum would be enough for her studies, so
that all that was lacking was the price of her fare back home. Fernanda was against the trip until the
last moment, scandalized by the idea that Brussels was so close to Paris and its perdition, but she
calmed down with the letter that Father Angel gave her addressed to a boardinghouse run by nuns
for Catholic young ladies where Amaranta Úrsula promised to stay until her studies were completed.
Furthermore, the parish priest arranged for her to travel under the care of a group of Franciscan
nuns who were going to Toledo, where they hoped to find dependable people to accompany her to
Belgium. While the urgent correspondence that made the coordination possible went forward,
Aureliano Segundo, aided by Petra Cates, prepared Amaranta Úrsula’s baggage. The night on which
they were packing one of Fernanda’s bridal trunks, the things were so well organized that the
schoolgirl knew by heart which were the suits and cloth slippers she could wear crossing the Atlantic
and the blue cloth coat with copper buttons and the cordovan shoes she would wear when she
landed. She also knew how to walk so as not to fall into the water as she went up the gangplank, that
at no time was she to leave the company of the nuns or leave her cabin except to eat, and that for no
reason was she to answer the questions asked by people of any sex while they were at sea. She
carried a small bottle with drops for seasickness and a notebook written by Father Angel in his own
hand containing six prayers to be used against storms. Fernanda made her a canvas belt to keep her
money in, and she would not have to take it off even to sleep. She tried to give her the chamberpot,
washed out with lye and disinfected with alcohol, but Amaranta Úrsula refused it for fear that her
schoolmates would make fun of her. A few months later, at the hour of his death, Aureliano
Segundo would remember her as he had seen her for the last time as she tried unsuccessfully to
lower the window of the second-class coach to hear Fernanda’s last piece of advice. She was wearing
a pink silk dress with a corsage of artificial pansies pinned to her left shoulder, her cordovan shoes
with buckles and low heels, and sateen stockings held up at the thighs with elastic garters. Her body


was slim, her hair loose and long, and she had the lively eyes that Úrsula had had at her age and the
way in which she said good-bye, without crying but without smiling either, revealed the same
strength of character. Walking beside the coach as it picked up speed and holding Fernanda by the
arm so that she would not stumble, Aureliano scarcely had time to wave at his daughter as she threw
him a kiss with the tips of her fingers. The couple stood motionless under the scorching sun,
looking at the train as it merged with the black strip of the horizon, linking arms for the first time
since the day of their wedding.

On the ninth of August, before they received the first letter from Brussels, José Arcadio Segundo
was speaking to Aureliano in Melquíades’ room and, without realizing it, he said:

“Always remember that they were more than three thousand and that they were thrown into the
sea.”

Then he fell back on the parchments and died with his eyes open. At that same instant, in
Fernanda’s bed, his twin brother came to the end of the prolonged and terrible martyrdom of the
steel crabs that were eating his throat away. One week previously he had returned home, without any
voice, unable to breathe, and almost skin and bones, with his wandering trunks and his wastrel’s
accordion, to fulfill the promise of dying beside his wife. Petra Cotes helped him pack his clothes
and bade him farewell without shedding a tear, but she forgot to give him the patent leather shoes
that he wanted to wear in his coffin. So when she heard that he had died, she dressed in black,
wrapped the shoes up in a newspaper, and asked Fernanda for permission to see the body. Fernanda
would not let her through the door.

“Put yourself in my place,” Petra Cotes begged. “Imagine how much I must have loved him to
put up with this humiliation.”

“There is no humiliation that a concubine does not deserve,” Fernanda replied. “So wait until
another one of your men dies and put the shoes on him.”

In fulfillment of her promise, Santa Sofía de la Piedad cut the throat of José Arcadio Segundo’s
corpse with a kitchen knife to be sure that they would not bury him alive. The bodies were placed in
identical coffins, and then it could be seen that once more in death they had become as Identical as
they had been until adolescence. Aureliano Segundo’s old carousing comrades laid on his casket a
wreath that had a purple ribbon with the words: Cease, cows, life is short. Fernanda was so indignant
with such irreverence that she had the wreath thrown onto the trash heap. In the tumult of the last
moment, the sad drunkards who carried them out of the house got the coffins mixed up and buried
them in the wrong graves.


Chapter 18

AURELIANO DID NOT leave Melquíades’ room for a long time. He learned by heart the fantastic
legends of the crumbling books, the synthesis of the studies of Hermann the Cripple, the notes on
the science of demonology, the keys to the philosopher’s stone, the Centuries of Nostradamus and his
research concerning the plague, so that he reached adolescence without knowing a thing about his
own time but with the basic knowledge of a medieval man. Any time that Santa Sofía de la Piedad
would go into his room she would find him absorbed in his reading. At dawn she would bring him a
mug of coffee without sugar and at noon a plate of rice and slices of fried plantain, which were the
only things eaten in the house since the death of Aureliano Segundo. She saw that his hair was cut,
picked off the nits, took in to his size the old clothing that she found in forgotten trunks, and when
his mustache began to appear the brought him Colonel Aureliano Buendía’s razor and the small
gourd he had used as a shaving mug. None of the latter’s children had looked so much like him, not
even Aureliano José, particularly in respect to the prominent cheekbones and the firm and rather
pitiless line of the lips. As had happened to Úrsula with Aureliano Segundo when the latter was
studying in the room, Santa Sofía de la Piedad thought that Aureliano was talking to himself.
Actually, he was talking to Melquíades. One burning noon, a short time after the death of the twins,
against the light of the window he saw the gloomy old man with his crow’s-wing hat like the
materialization of a memory that had been in his head since long before he was born. Aureliano had
finished classifying the alphabet of the parchments, so that when Melquíades asked him if he had
discovered the language in which they had been written he did not hesitate to answer.

“Sanskrit,” he said.

Melquíades revealed to him that his opportunities to return to the room were limited. But he
would go in peace to the meadows of the ultimate death because Aureliano would have time to learn
Sanskrit during the years remaining until the parchments became one hundred years old, when they
could be deciphered. It was he who indicated to Aureliano that on the narrow street going down to
the river, where dreams had been interpreted during the time of the banana company, a wise
Catalonian had a bookstore where there was a Sanskrit primer, which would be eaten by the moths
within six years if he did not hurry to buy it. For the first time in her long life Santa Sofía de la
Piedad let a feeling show through, and it was a feeling of wonderment when Aureliano asked her to
bring him the book that could be found between Jerusalem Delivered and Milton’s poems on the
extreme right-hand side of the second shelf of the bookcases. Since she could not read, she memo-
rized what he had said and got some money by selling one of the seventeen little gold fishes left in
the workshop, the whereabouts of which, after being hidden the night the soldiers searched the
house, was known only by her and Aureliano.

Aureliano made progress in his studies of Sanskrit as Melquíades’ visits became less and less
frequent and he was more distant, fading away in the radiant light of noon. The last time that
Aureliano sensed him he was only an invisible presence who murmured: “I died of fever on the
sands of Singapore.” The room then became vulnerable to dust, heat, termites, red ants, and moths,
who would turn the wisdom of the parchments into sawdust.

There was no shortage of food in the house. The day after the death of Aureliano Segundo, one
of the friends who had brought the wreath with the irreverent inscription offered to pay Fernanda
some money that he had owed her husband. After that every Wednesday a delivery boy brought a
basket of food that was quite sufficient for a week. No one ever knew that those provisions were
being sent by Petra Cotes with the idea that the continuing charity was a way of humiliating the
person who had humiliated her. Nevertheless, the rancor disappeared much sooner than she herself


had expected, and then she continued sending the food out of pride and finally out of compassion.
Several times, when she had no animals to raffle off and people lost interest in the lottery, she went
without food so that Fernanda could have something to eat, and she continued fulfilling the pledge
to herself until she saw Fernanda’s funeral procession pass by.

For Santa Sofía de la Piedad the reduction in the number of inhabitants of the house should have
meant the rest she deserved after more than half a century of work. Never a lament had been heard
from that stealthy, impenetrable woman who had sown in the family the angelic seed of Remedios
the Beauty and the mysterious solemnity of José Arcadio Segundo; who dedicated a whole life of
solitude and diligence to the rearing of children although she could barely remember whether they
were her children or grandchildren, and who took care of Aureliano as if he had come out of her
womb, not knowing herself that she was his great-grandmother. Only in a house like that was it
conceivable for her always to sleep on a mat she laid out on the pantry floor in the midst of the
nocturnal noise of the rats, and without telling anyone that one night she had awakened with the
frightened feeling that someone was looking at her in the darkness and that it was a poisonous snake
crawling over her stomach. She knew that if she had told Úrsula, the latter would have made her
sleep in her own bed, but those were times when no one was aware of anything unless it was
shouted on the porch, because with the bustle of the bakery, the surprises of the war, the care of the
children, there was not much room for thinking about other peoples happiness. Petra Cotes whom
she had never seen, was the only one who remembered her. She saw to it that she had a good pair of
shoes for street wear, that she always had clothing, even during the times when the raffles were
working only through some miracle. When Fernanda arrived at the house she had good reason to
think that she was an ageless servant, and even though she heard it said several times that she was
her husband’s mother it was so incredible that it took her longer to discover it than to forget it.
Santa Sofía de la Piedad never seemed bothered by that lowly position. On the contrary, one had the
impression that she liked to stay in the corners, without a pause, without a complaint, keeping clean
and in order the immense house that she had lived in ever since adolescence and that, especially
during the time of the banana company, was more like a barracks than a home. But when Úrsula
died the superhuman diligence of Santa Sofía de la Piedad, her tremendous capacity for work, began
to fall apart. It was not only that she was old and exhausted, but overnight the house had plunged
into a crisis of senility. A soft moss grew up the walls. When there was no longer a bare spot in the
courtyard, the weeds broke through the cement of the porch, breaking it like glass, and out of the
cracks grew the same yellow flowers that Úrsula had found in the glass with Melquíades’ false teeth a
century before. With neither the time nor the resources to halt the challenge of nature, Santa Sofía
de la Piedad spent the day in the bedrooms driving out the lizards who would return at night. One
morning she saw that the red ants had left the undermined foundations, crossed the garden, climbed
up the railing, where the begonias had taken on an earthen color, and had penetrated into the heart
of the house. She first tried to kill them with a broom, then with insecticides, and finally with lye, but
the next day they were back in the same place, still passing by, tenacious and invincible. Fernanda,
writing letters to her children, was not aware of the unchecked destructive attack. Santa Sofía de la
Piedad continued struggling alone, fighting the weeds to stop them from getting into the kitchen,
pulling from the walls the tassels of spider webs which were rebuilt in a few hours, scraping off the
termites. But when she saw that Melquíades’ room was also dusty and filled with cobwebs even
though she swept and dusted three times a day, and that in spite of her furious cleaning it was
threatened by the debris and the air of misery that had been foreseen only by Colonel Aureliano
Buendía and the young officer, she realized that she was defeated. Then she put on her worn Sunday
dress, some old shoes of Úrsula’s, and a pair of cotton stockings that Amaranta Úrsula had given
her, and she made a bundle out of the two or three changes of clothing that she had left.

“I give up,” she said to Aureliano. “This is too much house for my poor bones.”


Aureliano asked her where she was going and she made a vague sign, as if she did not have the
slightest idea of her destination. She tried to be more precise, however, saying that she was going to
spend her last years with a first cousin who lived in Riohacha. It was not a likely explanation. Since
the death of her parents she had not had contact with anyone in town or received letters or
messages, nor had she been heard to speak of any relatives. Aureliano gave her fourteen little gold
fishes because she was determined to leave with only what she had: one peso and twenty-five cents.
From the window of the room he saw her cross the courtyard with her bundle of clothing, dragging
her feet and bent over by her years, and he saw her reach her hand through an opening in the main
door and replace the bar after she had gone out. Nothing was ever heard of her again.

When she heard about the flight, Fernanda ranted for a whole day as she checked trunks,
dressers, and closets, item by item, to make sure that Santa Sofía de la Piedad had not made off with
anything. She burned her fingers trying to light a fire for the first time in her life and she had to ask
Aureliano to do her the favor of showing her how to make coffee. Fernanda would find her
breakfast ready when she arose and she would leave her room again only to get the meal that
Aureliano had left covered on the embers for her, which she would carry to the table to eat on linen
tablecloths and between candelabra, sitting at the solitary head of the table facing fifteen empty
chairs. Even under those circumstances Aureliano and Fernanda did not share their solitude, but
both continued living on their own, cleaning their respective rooms while the cobwebs fell like snow
on the rose bushes, carpeted the beams, cushioned the walls. It was around that time that Fernanda
got the impression that the house was filling up with elves. It was as if things, especially those for
everyday use, had developed a faculty for changing location on their own. Fernanda would waste
time looking for the shears that she was sure she had put on the bed and after turning everything
upside down she would find them on a shelf in the kitchen, where she thought she had not been for
four days. Suddenly there was no fork in the silver chest and she would find six on the altar and
three in the washroom. That wandering about of things was even more exasperating when she sat
down to write. The inkwell that she had placed at her right would be on the left, the blotter would
be lost and she would find it two days later under her pillow, and the pages written to José Arcadio
would get mixed up with those written to Amaranta Úrsula, and she always had the feeling of
mortification that she had put the letters in opposite envelopes, as in fact happened several times.
On one occasion she lost her fountain pen. Two weeks later the mailman, who had found it in his
bag, returned it. He had been going from house to house looking for its owner. At first she thought
it was some business of the invisible doctors, like the disappearance of the pessaries, and she even
started a letter to them begging them to leave her alone, but she had to interrupt it to do something
and when she went back to her room she not only did not find the letter she had started but she had
forgotten the reason for writing it. For a time she thought it was Aureliano. She began to spy on
him, to put things in his path trying to catch him when he changed their location, but she was soon
convinced that Aureliano never left Melquíades’ room except to go to the kitchen or the toilet, and
that he was not a man to play tricks. So in the end she believed that it was the mischief of elves and
she decided to secure everything in the place where she would use it. She tied the shears to the head
of her bed with a long string. She tied the pen and the blotter to the leg of the table, and the glued
the inkwell to the top of it to the right of the place where she normally wrote. The problems were
not solved overnight, because a few hours after she had tied the string to the shears it was not long
enough for her to cut with, as if the elves had shortened it. The same thing happened to her with the
string to the pen and even with her own arm which after a short time of writing could not reach the
inkwell. Neither Amaranta Úrsula in Brussels nor José Arcadio in Rome ever heard about those
insignificant misfortunes. Fernanda told them that she was happy and in reality she was, precisely
because she felt free from any compromise, as if life were pulling her once more toward the world
of her parents, where one did not suffer with day-to-day problems because they were solved


beforehand in one’s imagination. That endless correspondence made her lose her sense of time,
especially after Santa Sofía de la Piedad had left. She had been accustomed to keep track of the days,
months, and years, using as points of reference the dates set for the return of her children. But when
they changed their plans time and time again, the dates became confused, the periods were mislaid,
and one day seemed so much like another that one could not feel them pass. Instead of becoming
impatient, she felt a deep pleasure in the delay. It did not worry her that many years after
announcing the eve of his final vows, José Arcadio was still saying that he was waiting to finish his
studies in advanced theology in order to undertake those in diplomacy, because she understood how
steep and paved with obstacles was the spiral stairway that led to the throne of Saint Peter. On the
other hand, her spirits rose with news that would have been insignificant for other people, such as
the fact that her son had seen the Pope. She felt a similar pleasure when Amaranta Úrsula wrote to
tell her that her studies would last longer than the time foreseen because her excellent grades had
earned her privileges that her father had not taken into account in his calculations.

More than three years had passed since Santa Sofía de la Piedad had brought him the grammar
when Aureliano succeeded in translating the first sheet. It was not a useless chore. but it was only a
first step along a road whose length it was impossible to predict, because the text in Spanish did not
mean anything: the lines were in code. Aureliano lacked the means to establish the keys that would
permit him to dig them out, but since Melquíades had told him that the books he needed to get to
the bottom of the parchments were in the wise Catalonian’s store, he decided to speak to Fernanda
so that she would let him get them. In the room devoured by rubble, whose unchecked proliferation
had finally defeated it, he thought about the best way to frame the request, but when he found
Fernanda taking her meal from the embers, which was his only chance to speak to her, the
laboriously formulated request stuck in his throat and he lost his voice. That was the only time that
he watched her. He listened to her steps in the bedroom. He heard her on her way to the door to
await the letters from her children and to give hers to the mailman, and he listened until late at night
to the harsh, impassioned scratching of her pen on the paper before hearing the sound of the light
switch and the murmur of her prayers in the darkness. Only then did he go to sleep, trusting that on
the following day the awaited opportunity would come. He became so inspired with the idea that
permission would be granted that one morning he cut his hair, which at that time reached down to
his shoulders, shaved off his tangled beard, put on some tight-fitting pants and a shirt with an
artificial collar that he had inherited from he did not know whom, and waited in the kitchen for
Fernanda to get her breakfast. The woman of every day, the one with her head held high and with a
stony gait, did not arrive, but an old woman of supernatural beauty with a yellowed ermine cape, a
crown of gilded cardboard, and the languid look of a person who wept in secret. Actually, ever since
she had found it in Aureliano Segundo’s trunks, Fernanda had put on the moth-eaten queen’s dress
many times. Anyone who could have seen her in front of the mirror, in ecstasy over her own regal
gestures, would have had reason to think that she was mad. But she was not. She had simply turned
the royal regalia into a device for her memory. The first time that she put it on she could not help a
knot from forming in her heart and her eyes filling with tears because at that moment she smelled
once more the odor of shoe polish on the boots of the officer who came to get her at her house to
make her a queen, and her soul brightened with the nostalgia of her lost dreams. She felt so old, so
worn out, so far away from the best moments of her life that she even yearned for those that she
remembered as the worst, and only then did she discover how much she missed the whiff of
oregano on the porch and the smell of the roses at dusk, and even the bestial nature of the parvenus.
Her heart of compressed ash, which had resisted the most telling blows of daily reality without
strain, fell apart with the first waves of nostalgia. The need to feel sad was becoming a vice as the
years eroded her. She became human in her solitude. Nevertheless, the morning on which she
entered the kitchen and found a cup of coffee offered her by a pale and bony adolescent with a


hallucinated glow in his eyes, the claws of ridicule tore at her. Not only did she refuse him
permission, but from then on she carried the keys to the house in the pocket where she kept the
unused pessaries. It was a useless precaution because if he had wanted to, Aureliano could have
escaped and even returned to the house without being seen. But the prolonged captivity, the
uncertainty of the world, the habit of obedience had dried up the seeds of rebellion in his heart. So
that he went back to his enclosure, reading and rereading the parchments and listening until very late
at night to Fernanda sobbing in her bedroom. One morning he went to light the fire as usual and on
the extinguished ashes he found the food that he had left for her the day before. Then he looked
into her bedroom and saw her lying on the bed covered with the ermine cape, more beautiful than
ever and with her skin turned into an ivory casing. Four months later, when José Arcadio arrived, he
found her intact.

It was impossible to conceive of a man more like his mother. He was wearing a somber taffeta
suit, a shirt with a round and hard collar, and a thin silk ribbon tied in a bow in place of a necktie.
He was ruddy and languid with a startled look and weak lips. His black hair, shiny and smooth,
parted in the middle of his head by a straight and tired line, had the same artificial appearance as the
hair on the saints. The shadow of a well-uprooted beard on his paraffin face looked like a question
of conscience. His hands were pale, with green veins and fingers that were like parasites, and he
wore a solid gold ring with a round sunflower opal on his left index finger. When he opened the
street door Aureliano did not have to be told who he was to realize that he came from far away.
With his steps the house filled up with the fragrance of the toilet water that Úrsula used to splash on
him when he was a child in order to find him in the shadows, in some way impossible to ascertain,
after so many years of absence. José Arcadio was still an autumnal child, terribly sad and solitary. He
went directly to his mother’s bedroom, where Aureliano had boiled mercury for four months in his
grandfather’s grandfather’s water pipe to conserve the body according to Melquíades’ formula. José
Arcadio did not ask him any questions. He kissed the corpse on the forehead and withdrew from
under her skirt the pocket of casing which contained three as yet unused pessaries and the key to her
cabinet. He did everything with direct and decisive movements, in contrast to his languid look. From
the cabinet he took a small damascene chest with the family crest and found on the inside, which
was perfumed with sandalwood, the long letter in which Fernanda unburdened her heart of the
numerous truths that she had hidden from him. He read it standing up, avidly but without anxiety,
and at the third page he stopped and examined Aureliano with a look of second recognition.

“So,” he said with a voice with a touch of razor in it, “You’re the bastard.”

“I’m Aureliano Buendía.”

“Go to your room,” José Arcadio said.

Aureliano went and did not come out again even from curiosity when he heard the sound of the
solitary funeral ceremonies. Sometimes, from the kitchen, he would see José Arcadio strolling
through the house, smothered by his anxious breathing, and he continued hearing his steps in the
ruined bedrooms after midnight. He did not hear his voice for many months, not only because José
Arcadio never addressed him, but also because he had no desire for it to happen or time to think
about anything else but the parchments. On Fernanda’s death he had taken out the next-to-the-last
little fish and gone to the wise Catalonian’s bookstore in search of the books he needed. Nothing he
saw along the way interested him, perhaps because he lacked any memories for comparison and the
deserted streets and desolate houses were the same as he had imagined them at a time when he
would have given his soul to know them. He had given himself the permission denied by Fernanda
and only once and for the minimum time necessary, so without pausing he went along the eleven
blocks that separated the house from the narrow street where dreams had been interpreted in other
days and he went panting into the confused and gloomy place where there was barely room to
move. More than a bookstore, it looked like a dump for used books, which were placed in disorder


on the shelves chewed by termites, in the corners sticky with cobwebs, and even in the spaces that
were supposed to serve as passageways. On a long table, also heaped with old books and papers, the
proprietor was writing tireless prose in purple letters, somewhat outlandish, and on the loose pages
of a school notebook. He had a handsome head of silver hair which fell down over his forehead like
the plume of a cockatoo, and his blue eyes, lively and close-set, revealed the gentleness of a man
who had read all of the books. He was wearing short pants and soaking in perspiration, and he did
not stop his writing to see who had come in. Aureliano had no difficulty in rescuing the five books
that he was looking for from that fabulous disorder, because they were exactly where Melquíades
had told him they would be. Without saying a word he handed them, along with the little gold fish,
to the wise Catalonian and the latter examined them, his eyelids contracting like two clams. “You
must be mad,” he said in his own language, shrugging his shoulders, and he handed back to
Aureliano the five books and the little fish.

“You can have them” he said in Spanish. “The last man who read these books must have been
Isaac the Blindman, so consider well what you’re doing.”

José Arcadio restored Meme’s bedroom and had the velvet curtains cleaned and mended along
with the damask on the canopy of the viceregal bed, and he put to use once more the abandoned
bathroom where the cement pool was blackened by a fibrous and rough coating. He restricted his
vest-pocket empire of worn, exotic clothing, false perfumes, and cheap jewelry to those places. The
only thing that seemed to worry him in the rest of the house were the saints on the family altar,
which he burned down to ashes one afternoon in a bonfire he lighted in the courtyard. He would
sleep until past eleven o’clock. He would go to the bathroom in a shabby robe with golden dragons
on it and a pair of slippers with yellow tassels, and there he would officiate at a rite which for its care
and length recalled Remedios the Beauty. Before bathing he would perfume the pool with the salts
that he carried in three alabaster flacons. He did not bathe himself with the gourd but would plunge
into the fragrant waters and remain there for two hours floating on his back, lulled by the coolness
and by the memory of Amaranta. A few days after arriving he put aside his taffeta suit, which in
addition to being too hot for the town was the only one that he had, and he exchanged it for some
tight-fitting pants very similar to those worn by Pietro Crespi during his dance lessons and a silk
shirt woven with thread from living caterpillars and with his initials embroidered over the heart.
Twice a week he would wash the complete change in the tub and would wear his robe until it dried
because he had nothing else to put on. He never ate at home. He would go out when the heat of
siesta time had eased and would not return until well into the night. Then he would continue his
anxious pacing, breathing like a cat and thinking about Amaranta. She and the frightful look of the
saints in the glow of the nocturnal lamp were the two memories he retained of the house. Many
times during the hallucinating Roman August he had opened his eyes in the middle of his sleep and
had seen Amaranta rising out of a marble-edged pool with her lace petticoats and the bandage on
her hand, idealized by the anxiety of exile. Unlike Aureliano José who tried to drown that image in
the bloody bog of war, he tried to keep it alive in the sink of concupiscence while he entertained his
mother with the endless fable of his pontifical vocation. It never occurred either to him or to
Fernanda to think that their correspondence was an exchange of fantasies. José Arcadio, who left
the seminary as soon as he reached Rome, continued nourishing the legend of theology and canon
law so as not to jeopardize the fabulous inheritance of which his mother’s delirious letters spoke and
which would rescue him from the misery and sordidness he shared with two friends in a Trastevere
garret. When he received Fernanda’s last letter, dictated by the foreboding of imminent death, he put
the leftovers of his false splendor into a suitcase and crossed the ocean in the hold of a ship where
immigrants were crammed together like cattle in a slaughterhouse, eating cold macaroni and wormy
cheese. Before he read Fernanda’s will, which was nothing but a detailed and tardy recapitulation of
her misfortunes, the broken-down furniture and the weeds on the porch had indicated that he had


fallen into a trap from which he would never escape, exiled forever from the diamond light and
timeless air of the Roman spring. During the crushing insomnia brought on by his asthma he would
measure and remeasure the depth of his misfortune as he went through the shadowy house where
the senile fussing of Úrsula had instilled a fear of the world in him. In order to be sure that she
would not lose him in the shadows, she had assigned him a corner of the bedroom, the only one
where he would be safe from the dead people who wandered through the house after sundown. “If
you do anything bad,” Úrsula would tell him, “the saints will let me know.” The terror-filled nights
of his childhood were reduced to that corner where he would remain motionless until it was time to
go to bed, perspiring with fear on a stool under the watchful and glacial eyes of the tattletale saints.
It was useless torture because even at that time he already had a terror of everything around him and
he was prepared to be frightened at anything he met in life: women on the street, who would ruin
his blood; the women in the house, who bore children with the tail of a pig; fighting cocks, who
brought on the death of men and remorse for the rest of one’s life; firearms, which with the mere
touch would bring down twenty years of war; uncertain ventures, which led only to disillusionment
and madness—everything, in short, everything that God had created in His infinite goodness and
that the devil had perverted. When he awakened, pressed in the vise of his nightmares, the light in
the window and the caresses of Amaranta in the bath and the pleasure of being powdered between
the legs with a silk puff would release him from the terror. Even Úrsula was different under the
radiant light in the garden because there she did not talk about fearful things but would brush his
teeth with charcoal powder so that he would have the radiant smile of a Pope, and she would cut
and polish his nails so that the pilgrims who came to Rome from all over the world would be
startled at the beauty of the Pope’s hands as he blessed them, and she would comb his hair like that
of a Pope, and she would sprinkle his body and his clothing with toilet water so that his body and
his clothes would have the fragrance of a Pope. In the courtyard of Castel Gandolfo he had seen the
Pope on a balcony making the same speech in seven languages for a crowd of pilgrims and the only
thing, indeed, that had drawn his attention was the whiteness of his hands, which seemed to have
been soaked in lye, the dazzling shine of his summer clothing, and the hidden breath of cologne.

Almost a year after his return home, having sold the silver candlesticks and the heraldic
chamberpot—which at the moment of truth turned out to have only a little gold plating on the
crest—in order to eat, the only distraction of José Arcadio was to pick up children in town so that
they could play in the house. He would appear with them at siesta time and have them skip rope in
the garden, sing on the porch, and do acrobatics on the furniture in the living room while he would
go among the groups giving lessons in good manners. At that time he had finished with the tight
pants and the silk shirts and was wearing an ordinary suit of clothing that he had bought in the Arab
stores, but he still maintained his languid dignity and his papal air. The children took over the house
just as Meme’s schoolmates had done in the past. Until well into the night they could be heard
chattering and singing and tap-dancing, so that the house resembled a boarding school where there
was no discipline. Aureliano did not worry about the invasion as long as they did not bother him in
Melquíades’ room. One morning two children pushed open the door and were startled at the sight
of a filthy and hairy man who was still deciphering the parchments on the worktable. They did not
dare go in, but they kept on watching the room. They would peep in through the cracks, whispering,
they threw live animals in through the transom, and on one occasion they nailed up the door and the
window and it took Aureliano half a day to force them open. Amused at their unpunished mischief,
four of the children went into the room one morning while Aureliano was in the kitchen, preparing
to destroy the parchments. But as soon as they laid hands on the yellowed sheets an angelic force
lifted them off the ground and held them suspended in the air until Aureliano returned and took the
parchments away from them. From then on they did not bother him.


The four oldest children, who wore short pants in spite of the fact that they were on the
threshold of adolescence, busied themselves with José Arcadio’s personal appearance. They would
arrive earlier than the others and spend the morning shaving him, giving him massages with hot
towels, cutting and polishing the nails on his hands and feet, and perfuming him with toilet water.
On several occasions they would get into the pool to soap him from head to toe as he floated on his
back thinking about Amaranta. Then they would dry him, powder his body, and dress him. One of
the children, who had curly blond hair and eyes of pink glass like a rabbit, was accustomed to
sleeping in the house. The bonds that linked him to José Arcadio were so strong that he would
accompany him in his asthmatic insomnia, without speaking, strolling through the house with him in
the darkness. One night in the room where Úrsula had slept they saw a yellow glow coming through
the crumbling cement as if an underground sun had changed the floor of the room into a pane of
glass. They did not have to turn on the light. It was sufficient to lift the broken slabs in the corner
where Úrsula’s bed had always stood and where the glow was most intense to find the secret crypt
that Aureliano Segundo had worn himself out searching for during the delirium of his excavations.
There were the three canvas sacks closed with copper wire, and inside of them the seven thousand
two hundred fourteen pieces of eight, which continued glowing like embers in the darkness.

The discovery of the treasure was like a deflagration. Instead of returning to Rome with the
sudden fortune, which had been his dream maturing in misery, José Arcadio converted the house
into a decadent paradise. He replaced the curtains and the canopy of the bed with new velvet, and he
had the bathroom floor covered with paving stones and the walls with tiles. The cupboard in the
dining room was filled with fruit preserves, hams, and pickles, and the unused pantry was opened
again for the storage of wines and liqueurs which José Arcadio himself brought from the railroad
station in crates marked with his name. One night he and the four oldest children had a party that
lasted until dawn. At six in the morning they came out naked from the bedroom, drained the pool,
and filled it with champagne. They jumped in en masse, swimming like birds flying through a sky
gilded with fragrant bubbles, while José Arcadio, floated on his back on the edge of the festivities,
remembering Amaranta with his eyes open. He remained that way, wrapped up in himself, thinking
about the bitterness of his equivocal pleasures until after the children had become tired and gone in
a troop to the bedroom. where they tore down the curtains to dry themselves, and in the disorder
they broke the rock crystal mirror into four pieces and destroyed the canopy of the bed in the tumult
of lying down. When José Arcadio came back from the bathroom, he found them sleeping in a
naked heap in the shipwrecked bedroom. Inflamed, not so much because of the damage as because
of the disgust and pity that he felt for himself in the emptiness of the saturnalia, he armed himself
with an ecclesiastical cat-o-nine-tails that he kept in the bottom of his trunk along with a hair-shirt
and other instruments of mortification and penance, and drove the children out of the house,
howling like a madman and whipping them without mercy as a person would not even have done to
a pack of coyotes. He was done in, with an attack of asthma that lasted for several days and that
gave him the look of a man on his deathbed. On the third night of torture, overcome by
asphyxiation, he went to Aureliano’s room to ask him the favor of buying some powders to inhale at
a nearby drugstore. So it was that Aureliano, went out for a second time. He had to go only two
blocks to reach the small pharmacy with dusty windows and ceramic bottles with labels in Latin
where a girl with the stealthy beauty of a serpent of the Nile gave him the medicine the name of
which José Arcadio had written down on a piece of paper. The second view of the deserted town,
barely illuminated by the yellowish bulbs of the street lights, did not awaken in Aureliano any more
curiosity than the first. José Arcadio, had come to think that he had run away, when he reappeared,
panting a little because of his haste, dragging legs that enclosure and lack of mobility had made weak
and heavy. His indifference toward the world was so certain that a few days later José Arcadio
violated the promise he had made to his mother and left him free to go out whenever he wanted to.


“I have nothing to do outside,” Aureliano answered him.

He remained shut up, absorbed in the parchments, which he was slowly unraveling and whose
meaning, nevertheless, he was unable to interpret. José Arcadio would bring slices of ham to him in
his room, sugared flowers which left a spring-like aftertaste in his mouth, and on two occasions a
glass of fine wine. He was not interested in the parchments, which he thought of more as an esoteric
pastime, but his attention was attracted by the rare wisdom and the inexplicable knowledge of the
world that his desolate kinsman had. He discovered then that he could understand written English
and that between parchments he had gone from the first page to the last of the six volumes of the
encyclopedia as if it were a novel. At first he attributed to that the fact that Aureliano could speak
about Rome as if he had lived there many years, but he soon became aware that he knew things that
were not in the encyclopedia, such as the price of items. “Everything is known,” was the only reply
he received from Aureliano when he asked him where he had got that information from. Aureliano,
for his part, was surprised that José Arcadio when seen from close by was so different from the
image that he had formed of him when he saw him wandering through the house. He was capable of
laughing, of allowing himself from time to time a feeling of nostalgia for the past of the house, and
of showing concern for the state of misery present in Melquíades’ room. That drawing closer
together of two solitary people of the same blood was far from friendship, but it did allow them
both to bear up better under the unfathomable solitude that separated and united them at the same
time. José Arcadio could then turn to Aureliano to untangle certain domestic problems that
exasperated him. Aureliano, in turn, could sit and read on the porch, waiting for the letters from
Amaranta Úrsula, which still arrived with the usual punctuality, and could use the bathroom, from
which José Arcadio had banished him when he arrived.

One hot dawn they both woke up in alarm at an urgent knocking on the street door. It was a dark
old man with large green eyes that gave his face a ghostly phosphorescence and with a cross of ashes
on his forehead. His clothing in tatters, his shoes cracked, the old knapsack on his shoulder his only
luggage, he looked like a beggar, but his bearing had a dignity that was in frank contradiction to his
appearance. It was only necessary to look at him once, even in the shadows of the parlor, to realize
that the secret strength that allowed him to live was not the instinct of self-preservation but the
habit of fear. It was Aureliano Amador, the only survivor of Colonel Aureliano Buendía’s seventeen
sons, searching for a respite in his long and hazardous existence as a fugitive. He identified himself,
begged them to give him refuge in that house which during his nights as a pariah he had
remembered as the last redoubt of safety left for him in life. But José Arcadio and Aureliano did not
remember him. Thinking that he was a tramp, they pushed him into the street. They both saw from
the doorway the end of a drama that had began before José Arcadio had reached the age of reason.
Two policemen who had been chasing Aureliano Amador for years, who had tracked him like
bloodhounds across half the world, came out from among the almond trees on the opposite
sidewalk and took two shots with their Mausers which neatly penetrated the cross of ashes.

Ever since he had expelled the children from the house, José Arcadio was really waiting for news
of an ocean liner that would leave for Naples before Christmas. He had told Aureliano and had even
made plans to set him up in a business that would bring him a living, because the baskets of food
had stopped coming since Fernanda’s burial. But that last dream would not be fulfilled either. One
September morning, after having coffee in the kitchen with Aureliano, José Arcadio was finishing
his daily bath when through the openings in the tiles the four children he had expelled from the
house burst in. Without giving him time to defend himself, they jumped into the pool fully clothed,
grabbed him by the hair, and held his head under the water until the bubbling of his death throes
ceased on the surface and his silent and pale dolphin body dipped down to the bottom of the
fragrant water. Then they took out the three sacks of gold from the hiding place which was known
only to them and their victim. It was such a rapid, methodical, and brutal action that it was like a


military operation. Aureliano, shut up in his room, was not aware of anything. That afternoon, hav-
ing missed him in the kitchen, he looked for José Arcadio all over the house and found him floating
on the perfumed mirror of the pool, enormous and bloated and still thinking about Amaranta. Only
then did he understand how much he had began to love him.


Chapter 19

AMARANTA ÚRSULA returned with the angels of December, driven on a sailor’s breeze, leading her
husband by a silk rope tied around his neck. She appeared without warning, wearing an ivory-
colored dress, a string of pearls that reached almost to her knees, emerald and topaz rings, and with
her straight hair in a smooth bun held behind her ears by swallow-tail brooches. The man whom she
had married six months before was a thin, older Fleming with the look of a sailor about him. She
had only to push open the door to the parlor to realize that her absence had been longer and more
destructive than she had imagined.

“Good Lord,” she shouted, more gay than alarmed, “it’s obvious that there’s no woman in this
house!”

The baggage would not fit on the porch. Besides Fernanda’s old trunk, which they had sent her
off to school with, she had two upright trunks, four large suitcases, a bag for her parasols, eight
hatboxes, a gigantic cage with half a hundred canaries, and her husband’s velocipede, broken down
in a special case which allowed him to carry it like a cello. She did not even take a day of rest after
the long trip. She put on some worn denim overalls that her husband had brought along with other
automotive items and set about on a new restoration of the house. She scattered the red ants, who
had already taken possession of the porch, brought the rose bushes back to life, uprooted the weeds,
and planted ferns, oregano, and begonias again in the pots along the railing. She took charge of a
crew of carpenters, locksmiths, and masons, who filled in the cracks in the floor, put doors and
windows back on their hinges, repaired the furniture, and white-washed the walls inside and out, so
that three months after her arrival one breathed once more the atmosphere of youth and festivity
that had existed during the days of the pianola. No one in the house had ever been in a better mood
at all hours and under any circumstances, nor had anyone ever been readier to sing and dance and
toss all items and customs from the past into the trash. With a sweep of her broom she did away
with the funeral mementos and piles of useless trash and articles of superstition that had been piling
up in the corners, and the only thing she spared, out of gratitude to Úrsula, was the daguerreotype of
Remedios in the parlor. “My, such luxury,” she would shout, dying with laughter. “A fourteen-year-
old grandmother!” When one of the masons told her that the house was full of apparitions and that
the only way to drive them out was to look for the treasures they had left buried, she replied amid
loud laughter that she did not think it was right for men to be superstitious. She was so spontaneous,
so emancipated, with such a free and modern spirit, that Aureliano did not know what to do with his
body when he saw her arrive. “My, my!” she shouted happily with open arms. “Look at how my
darling cannibal has grown!” Before he had a chance to react she had already put a record on the
portable phonograph she had brought with her and was trying to teach him the latest dance steps.
She made him change the dirty pants that he had inherited from Colonel Aureliano Buendía and
gave him some youthful shirts and two-toned shoes, and she would push him into the street when
he was spending too much time in Melquíades’ room.

Active, small, and indomitable like Úrsula, and almost as pretty and provocative as Remedios the
Beauty, she was endowed with a rare instinct for anticipating fashion. When she received pictures of
the most recent fashions in the mail, they only proved that she had not been wrong about the
models that she designed herself and sewed on Amaranta’s primitive pedal machine. She subscribed
to every fashion magazine, art publication. and popular music review published in Europe, and she
had only to glance at them to realize that things in the world were going just as she imagined they
were. It was incomprehensible why a woman with that spirit would have returned to a dead town
burdened by dust and heat, and much less with a husband who had more than enough money to live


anywhere in the world and who loved her so much that he let himself be led around by her on a silk
leash. As time passed, however, her intention to stay was more obvious, because she did not make
any plans that were not a long way off, nor did she do anything that did not have as an aim the
search for a comfortable life and a peaceful old age in Macondo. The canary cage showed that those
aims were made up on the spur of the moment. Remembering that her mother had told her in a
letter about the extermination of the birds, she had delayed her trip several months until she found a
ship that stopped at the Fortunate Isles and there she chose the finest twenty-five pairs of canaries
so that she could repopulate the skies of Macondo. That was the most lamentable of her numerous
frustrated undertakings. As the birds reproduced Amaranta Úrsula would release them in pairs, and
no sooner did they feel themselves free than they fled the town. She tried in vain to awaken love in
them by means of the bird cage that Úrsula had built during the first reconstruction of the house.
Also in vain were the artificial nests built of esparto grass in the almond trees and the birdseed
strewn about the roofs, and arousing the captives so that their songs would dissuade the deserters,
because they would take flights on their first attempts and make a turn in the sky, just the time
needed to find the direction to the Fortunate Isles.

A year after her return, although she had not succeeded in making any friends or giving any
parties, Amaranta Úrsula still believed that it was possible to rescue the community which had been
singled out by misfortune. Gaston, her husband, took care not to antagonize her, although since that
fatal noon when he got off the train he realized that his wife’s determination had been provoked by
a nostalgic mirage. Certain that she would be defeated by the realities, he did not even take the
trouble to put his velocipede together, but he set about hunting for the largest eggs among the
spider webs that the masons had knocked down, and he would open them with his fingernails and
spend hours looking through a magnifying glass at the tiny spiders that emerged. Later on, thinking
that Amaranta Úrsula was continuing with her repairs so that her hands would not be idle, he
decided to assemble the handsome bicycle, on which the front wheel was much larger than the rear
one, and he dedicated himself to the capture and curing of every native insect he could find in the
region, which he sent in jam jars to his former professor of natural history at the University of Liège
where he had done advanced work in entomology, although his main vocation was that of aviator.
When he rode the bicycle he would wear acrobat’s tights, gaudy socks, and a Sherlock Holmes cap,
but when he was on foot he would dress in a spotless natural linen suit, white shoes, a silk bow tie, a
straw boater, and he would carry a willow stick in his hand. His pale eyes accentuated his look of a
sailor and his small mustache looked like the fur of a squirrel. Although he was at least fifteen years
older than his wife, his alert determination to make her happy and his qualities as a good lover
compensated for the difference. Actually, those who saw that man in his forties with careful habits,
with the leash around his neck and his circus bicycle, would not have thought that he had made a
pact of unbridled love with his wife and that they both gave in to the reciprocal drive in the least
adequate of places and wherever the spirit moved them, as they had done since they had began to
keep company, and with a passion that the passage of time and the more and more unusual
circumstances deepened and enriched. Gaston was not only a fierce lover, with endless wisdom and
imagination, but he was also, perhaps, the first man in the history of the species who had made an
emergency landing and had come close to killing himself and his sweetheart simply to make love in a
field of violets.

They had met two years before they were married, when the sports biplane in which he was
making rolls over the school where Amaranta Úrsula was studying made an intrepid maneuver to
avoid the flagpole and the primitive framework of canvas and aluminum foil was caught by the tail
on some electric wires. From then on, paying no attention to his leg in splints, on weekends he
would pick up Amaranta Úrsula at the nun’s boardinghouse where she lived, where the rules were
not as severe as Fernanda had wanted, and he would take her to his country club. They began to


love each other at an altitude of fifteen hundred feet in the Sunday air of the moors, and they felt all
the closer together as the beings on earth grew more and more minute. She spoke to him of
Macondo as the brightest and most peaceful town on earth, and of an enormous house, scented
with oregano, where she wanted to live until old age with a loyal husband and two strong sons who
would be named Rodrigo and Gonzalo, never Aureliano and José Arcadio, and a daughter who
would be named Virginia and never Remedios. She had evoked the town idealized by nostalgia with
such strong tenacity that Gaston understood that she would not get married unless he took her to
live in Macondo. He agreed to it, as he agreed later on to the leash, because he thought it was a
passing fancy that could be overcome in time. But when two years in Macondo had passed and
Amaranta Úrsula was as happy as on the first day, he began to show signs of alarm. By that time he
had dissected every dissectible insect in the region, he spoke Spanish like a native, and he had solved
all of the crossword puzzles in the magazines that he received in the mail. He did not have the
pretext of climate to hasten their return because nature had endowed him with a colonial liver which
resisted the drowsiness of siesta time and water that had vinegar worms in it. He liked the native
cooking so much that once he ate eighty-two iguana eggs at one sitting. Amaranta Úrsula, on the
other hand, had brought in by train fish and shellfish in boxes of ice, canned meats and preserved
fruits, which were the only things she could eat, and she still dressed in European style and received
designs by mail in spite of the fact that she had no place to go and no one to visit and by that time
her husband was not in a mood to appreciate her short skirts, her tilted felt hat, and her seven-strand
necklaces. Her secret seemed to lie in the fact that she always found a way to keep busy, resolving
domestic problems that she herself had created, and doing a poor job on a thousand things which
she would fix on the following day with a pernicious diligence that made one think of Fernanda and
the hereditary vice of making something just to unmake it. Her festive genius was still so alive then
that when she received new records she would invite Gaston to stay in the parlor until very late to
practice the dance steps that her schoolmates described to her in sketches and they would generally
end up making love on the Viennese rocking chairs or on the bare floor. The only thing that she
needed to be completely happy was the birth of her children, but she respected the pact she had
made with her husband not to have any until they had been married for five years.

Looking for something to fill his idle hours with, Gaston became accustomed to spending the
morning in Melquíades’ room with the shy Aureliano. He took pleasure in recalling with him the
most hidden corners of his country, which Aureliano knew as if he had spent much time there.
When Gaston asked him what he had done to obtain knowledge that was not in the encyclopedia,
he received the same answer as José Arcadio: “Everything Is known.” In addition to Sanskrit he had
learned English and French and a little Latin and Greek. Since he went out every afternoon at that
time and Amaranta Úrsula had set aside a weekly sum for him for his personal expenses, his room
looked like a branch of the wise Catalonian’s bookstore. He read avidly until late at night, although
from the manner in which he referred to his reading, Gaston thought that he did not buy the books
in order to learn but to verify the truth of his knowledge, and that none of them interested him
more than the parchments, to which he dedicated most of his time in the morning. Both Gaston and
his wife would have liked to incorporate him into the family life, but Aureliano was a hermetic man
with a cloud of mystery that time was making denser. It was such an unfathomable condition that
Gaston failed in his efforts to become intimate with him and had to seek other pastimes for his idle
hours. It was around that time that he conceived the idea of establishing an airmail service.

It was not a new project. Actually, he had it fairly well advanced when he met Amaranta Úrsula,
except that it was not for Macondo, but for the Belgian Congo, where his family had investments in
palm oil. The marriage and the decision to spend a few months in Macondo to please his wife had
obliged him to postpone it. But when he saw that Amaranta Úrsula was determined to organize a
commission for public improvement and even laughed at him when he hinted at the possibility of


returning, he understood that things were going to take a long time and he reestablished contact
with his forgotten partners in Brussels, thinking that it was just as well to be a pioneer in the
Caribbean as in Africa. While his steps were progressing he prepared a landing field in the old
enchanted region which at that time looked like a plain of crushed flintstone, and he studied the
wind direction, the geography of the coastal region, and the best routes for aerial navigation, without
knowing that his diligence, so similar to that of Mr. Herbert, was filling the town with the dangerous
suspicion that his plan was not to set up routes but to plant banana trees. Enthusiastic over the idea
that, after all, might justify his permanent establishment in Macondo, he took several trips to the
capital of the province, met with authorities, obtained licenses, and drew up contracts for exclusive
rights. In the meantime he maintained a correspondence with his partners in Brussels which
resembled that of Fernanda with the invisible doctors, and he finally convinced them to ship the
first airplane under the care of an expert mechanic, who would assemble it in the nearest port and
fly it to Macondo. One year after his first meditations and meteorological calculations, trusting in the
repeated promises of his correspondents, he had acquired the habit of strolling through the streets,
looking at the sky, hanging onto the sound of the breeze in hopes that the airplane would appear.

Although she had not noticed it, the return of Amaranta Úrsula had brought on a radical change
in Aureliano’s life. After the death of José Arcadio he had become a regular customer at the wise
Catalonian’s bookstore. Also, the freedom that he enjoyed then and the time at his disposal awoke in
him a certain curiosity about the town, which he came to know without any surprise. He went
through the dusty and solitary streets, examining with scientific interest the inside of houses in ruin,
the metal screens on the windows broken by rust and the dying birds, and the inhabitants bowed
down by memories. He tried to reconstruct in his imagination the annihilated splendor of the old
banana-company town, whose dry swimming pool was filled to the brim with rotting men’s and
women’s shoes, and in the houses of which, destroyed by rye grass, he found the skeleton of a
German shepherd dog still tied to a ring by a steel chain and a telephone that was ringing, ringing,
ringing until he picked it up and an anguished and distant woman spoke in English, and he said yes,
that the strike was over, that three thousand dead people had been thrown into the sea, that the
banana company had left, and that Macondo finally had peace after many years. Those wanderings
led him to the prostrate red-light district, where in other times bundles of banknotes had been
burned to liven up the revels, and which at that time was a maze of streets more afflicted and
miserable than the others, with a few red lights still burning and with deserted dance halls adorned
with the remnants of wreaths, where the pale, fat widows of no one, the French great-grandmothers
and the Babylonian matriarchs, were still waiting beside their photographs. Aureliano could not find
anyone who remembered his family, not even Colonel Aureliano Buendía, except for the oldest of
the West Indian Negroes, an old man whose cottony hair gave him the look of a photographic nega-
tive and who was still singing the mournful sunset psalms in the door of his house. Aureliano would
talk to him in the tortured Papiamento that he had learned in a few weeks and sometimes he would
share his chicken-head soup, prepared by the great-granddaughter, with him. She was a large black
woman with solid bones, the hips of a mare, teats like live melons, and a round and perfect head
armored with a hard surface of wiry hair which looked like a medieval warrior’s mail headdress. Her
name was Nigromanta. In those days Aureliano lived off the sale of silverware, candlesticks, and
other bric-a-brac from the house. When he was penniless, which was most of the time, he got
people in the back of the market to give him the chicken heads that they were going to throw away
and he would take them to Nigromanta to make her soups, fortified with purslane and seasoned
with mint. When the great-grandfather died Aureliano stopped going by the house, but he would run
into Nigromanta under the dark almond trees on the square, using her wild-animal whistles to lure
the few night owls. Many times he stayed with her, speaking in Papiamento about chicken-head soup
and other dainties of misery, and he would have kept right on if she had not let him know that his


presence frightened off customers. Although he sometimes felt the temptation and although
Nigromanta herself might have seemed to him as the natural culmination of a shared nostalgia, he
did not go to bed with her. So Aureliano was still a virgin when Amaranta Úrsula returned to
Macondo and gave him a sisterly embrace that left him breathless. Every time he saw her, and worse
yet when she showed him the latest dances, he felt the same spongy release in his bones that had
disturbed his great-great-grandfather when Pilar Ternera made her pretexts about the cards in the
granary. Trying to squelch the torment, he sank deeper into the parchments and eluded the innocent
flattery of that aunt who was poisoning his nights with a flow of tribulation, but the more he
avoided her the more the anxiety with which he waited for her stony laughter, her howls of a happy
cat, and her songs of gratitude, agonizing in love at all hours and in the most unlikely parts of the
house. One night thirty feet from his bed, on the silver workbench, the couple with unhinged bellies
broke the bottles and ended up making love in a pool of muriatic acid. Aureliano not only could not
sleep for a single second, but he spent the next day with a fever, sobbing with rage. The first night
that he waited for Nigromanta to come to the shadows of the almond trees it seemed like an
eternity, pricked as he was by the needles of uncertainty and clutching in his fist the peso and fifty
cents that he had asked Amaranta Úrsula for, not so much because he needed it as to involve her,
debase her, prostitute her in his adventure in some way. Nigromanta took him to her room, which
was lighted with false candlesticks, to her folding cot with the bedding stained from bad loves, and
to her body of a wild dog, hardened and without soul, which prepared itself to dismiss him as if he
were a frightened child, and suddenly it found a man whose tremendous power demanded a
movement of seismic readjustment from her insides.

They became lovers. Aureliano would spend his mornings deciphering parchments and at siesta
time he would go to the bedroom where Nigromanta was waiting for him, to teach him first how to
do it like earthworms, then like snails, and finally like crabs, until she had to leave him and lie in wait
for vagabond loves. Several weeks passed before Aureliano discovered that around her waist she
wore a small belt that seemed to be made out of a cello string, but which was hard as steel and had
no end, as if it had been born and grown with her. Almost always, between loves, they would eat
naked in the bed, in the hallucinating heat and under the daytime stars that the rust had caused to
shine on the zinc ceiling. It was the first time that Nigromanta had had a steady man, a bone crusher
from head to toe, as she herself said, dying with laughter, and she had even begun to get romantic
illusions when Aureliano confided in her about his repressed passion for Amaranta Úrsula, which he
had not been able to cure with the substitution but which was twisting him inside all the more as
experience broadened the horizons of love. After that Nigromanta continued to receive him with
the same warmth as ever but she made him pay for her services so strictly that when Aureliano had
no money she would make an addition to his bill, which was not figured in numbers but by marks
that she made with her thumbnail behind the door. At sundown, while she was drifting through the
shadows in the square, Aureliano, was going along the porch like a stranger, scarcely greeting
Amaranta Úrsula and Gaston, who usually dined at that time, and shutting herself up in his room
again, unable to read or write or even think because of the anxiety brought on by the laughter, the
whispering, the preliminary frolics, and then the explosions of agonizing happiness that capped the
nights in the house. That was his life two years before Gaston began to wait for the airplane, and it
went on the same way on the afternoon that he went to the bookstore of the wise Catalonian and
found four ranting boys in a heated argument about the methods used to kill cockroaches in the
Middle Ages. The old bookseller, knowing about Aureliano’s love for books that had been read only
by the Venerable Bede, urged him with a certain fatherly malice to get into the discussion, and
without even taking a breath, he explained that the cockroach, the oldest winged insect on the face
of the earth, had already been the victim of slippers in the Old Testament, but that since the species
was definitely resistant to any and all methods of extermination, from tomato dices with borax to


flour and sugar, and with its one thousand six hundred three varieties had resisted the most ancient,
tenacious, and pitiless persecution that mankind had unleashed against any living thing since the
beginnings, including man himself, to such an extent that just as an instinct for reproduction was at-
tributed to humankind, so there must have been another one more definite and pressing, which was
the instinct to kill cockroaches, and if the latter had succeeded in escaping human ferocity it was
because they had taken refuge in the shadows, where they became invulnerable because of man’s
congenital fear of the dark, but on the other hand they became susceptible to the glow of noon, so
that by the Middle Ages already, and in present times, and per omnia secula seculorum, the only effective
method for killing cockroaches was the glare of the sun.

That encyclopedic coincidence was the beginning of a great friendship. Aureliano continued
getting together in the afternoon with the four arguers, whose names were Álvaro, Germán,
Alfonso, and Gabriel, the first and last friends that he ever had in his life. For a man like him, holed
up in written reality, those stormy sessions that began in the bookstore and ended at dawn in the
brothels were a revelation. It had never occurred to him until then to think that literature was the
best plaything that had ever been invented to make fun of people, as Álvaro demonstrated during
one night of revels. Some time would have to pass before Aureliano realized that such arbitrary
attitudes had their origins in the example of the wise Catalonian, for whom wisdom was worth
nothing if it could not be used to invent a way of preparing chick peas.

The afternoon on which Aureliano gave his lecture on cockroaches, the argument ended up in
the house of the girls who went to bed because of hunger, a brothel of lies on the outskirts of
Macondo. The proprietress was a smiling mamasanta, tormented by a mania for opening and closing
doors. Her eternal smile seemed to have been brought on by the credulity of her customers, who
accepted as something certain an establishment that did not exist except in the imagination, because
even the tangible things there were unreal: the furniture that fell apart when one sat on it, the
disemboweled phonograph with a nesting hen inside, the garden of paper flowers, the calendars
going back to the years before the arrival of the banana company, the frames with prints cut out of
magazines that had never been published. Even the timid little whores who came from the neigh-
borhood: when the proprietress informed them that customers had arrived they were nothing but an
invention. They would appear without any greeting in their little flowered dresses left over from days
when they were five years younger, and they took them off with the same innocence with which they
had put them on, and in the paroxysms of love they would exclaim good heavens, look how that
roof is falling in, and as soon as they got their peso and fifty cents they would spend it on a roll with
cheese that the proprietress sold them, smiling more than ever, because only she knew that that meal
was not true either. Aureliano, whose world at that time began with Melquíades’ parchments and
ended in Nigromanta’s bed, found a stupid cure for timidity in the small imaginary brothel. At first
he could get nowhere, in rooms where the proprietress would enter during the best moments of love
and make all sorts of comments about the intimate charms of the protagonists. But with time he
began to get so familiar with those misfortunes of the world that on one night that was more
unbalanced than the others he got undressed in the small reception room and ran through the house
balancing a bottle of beer on his inconceivable maleness. He was the one who made fashionable the
extravagances that the proprietress celebrated with her eternal smile, without protesting, without
believing in them just as when Germán tried to burn the house down to show that it did not exist,
and as when Alfonso wrung the neck of the parrot and threw it into the pot where the chicken stew
was beginning to boil.

Although Aureliano felt himself linked to the four friends by a common affection and a common
solidarity, even to the point where he thought of them as if they were one person, he was closer to
Gabriel than to the others. The link was born on the night when he casually mentioned Colonel
Aureliano Buendía and Gabriel was the only one who did not think that he was making fun of


somebody. Even the proprietress, who normally did not take part in the conversation argued with a
madam’s wrathful passion that Colonel Aureliano Buendía, of whom she had indeed heard speak at
some time, was a figure invented by the government as a pretext for killing Liberals. Gabriel, on the
other hand, did not doubt the reality of Colonel Aureliano Buendía because he had been a
companion in arms and inseparable friend of his great-great-grandfather Colonel Gerineldo
Márquez. Those fickle tricks of memory were even more critical when the killing of the workers was
brought up. Every time that Aureliano mentioned the matter, not only the proprietress but some
people older than she would repudiate the myth of the workers hemmed in at the station and the
train with two hundred cars loaded with dead people, and they would even insist that, after all,
everything had been set forth in judicial documents and in primary-school textbooks: that the
banana company had never existed. So that Aureliano and Gabriel were linked by a kind of complic-
ity based on real facts that no one believed in, and which had affected their lives to the point that
both of them found themselves off course in the tide of a world that had ended and of which only
the nostalgia remained. Gabriel would sleep wherever time overtook him. Aureliano put him up
several times in the silver workshop, but he would spend his nights awake, disturbed by the noise of
the dead people who walked through the bedrooms until dawn. Later he turned him over to
Nigromanta, who took him to her well-used room when she was free and put down his account with
vertical marks behind the door in the few spaces left free by Aureliano’s debts.

In spite of their disordered life, the whole group tried to do something permanent at the urging
of the wise Catalonian. It was he, with his experience as a former professor of classical literature and
his storehouse of rare books, who got them to spend a whole night in search of the thirty-seventh
dramatic situation in a town where no one had any interest any more in going beyond primary
school. Fascinated by the discovery of friendship, bewildered by the enchantments of a world which
had been forbidden to him by Fernanda’s meanness, Aureliano abandoned the scrutiny of the
parchments precisely when they were beginning to reveal themselves as predictions in coded lines of
poetry. But the subsequent proof that there was time enough for everything without having to give
up the brothels gave him the drive to return to Melquíades’ room, having decided not to flag in his
efforts until he had discovered the last keys. That was during the time that Gaston began to wait for
the airplane and Amaranta Úrsula was so lonely that one morning she appeared in the room.

“Hello, cannibal,” she said to him. “Back in your cave again?”

She was irresistible, with a dress she had designed and one of the long shad-vertebra necklaces
that she herself had made. She had stopped using the leash, convinced of her husband’s faithfulness,
and for the first time since her return she seemed to have a moment of ease. Aureliano did not need
to see her to know that she had arrived. She put her elbows on the table, so close and so helpless
that Aureliano heard the deep sound of her bones, and she became interested in the parchments.
Trying to overcome his disturbance, he grasped at the voice that he was losing, the life that was
leaving him, the memory that was turning into a petrified polyp, and he spoke to her about the
priestly destiny of Sanskrit, the scientific possibility of seeing the future showing through in time as
one sees what is written on the back of a sheet of paper through the light, the necessity of
deciphering the predictions so that they would not defeat themselves, and the Centuries of
Nostradamus and the destruction of Cantabria predicted by Saint Milanus. Suddenly, without
interrupting the chat, moved by an impulse that had been sleeping in him since his origins,
Aureliano put his hand on hers, thinking that that final decision would put an end to his doubts. She
grabbed his index finger with the affectionate innocence with which she had done so in childhood,
however, and she held it while he kept on answering questions. They remained like that, linked by
icy index fingers that did not transmit anything in any way until she awoke from her momentary
dream and slapped her forehead with her hand. “The ants!” she exclaimed. And then she forgot
about the manuscripts, went to the door with a dance step, and from there she threw Aureliano a


kiss with the tips of her fingers as she had said good-bye to her father on the afternoon when they
sent her to Brussels.

“You can tell me later,” she said. “I forgot that today’s the day to put quicklime on the anthills.”

She continued going to the room occasionally when she had something to do in that part of the
house and she would stay there for a few minutes while her husband continued to scrutinize the sky.
Encouraged by that change, Aureliano stayed to eat with the family at that time as he had not done
since the first months of Amaranta Úrsula’s return. Gaston was pleased. During the conversations
after meals, which usually went on for more than an hour, he complained that his partners were
deceiving him. They had informed him of the loading of the airplane on board a ship that did not
arrive, and although his shipping agents insisted, that it would never arrive because it was not on the
list of Caribbean ships, his partners insisted that the shipment was correct and they even insinuated
that Gaston was lying to them in his letters. The correspondence reached such a degree of mutual
suspicion that Gaston decided not to write again and he began to suggest the possibility of a quick
trip to Brussels to clear things up and return with the airplane. The plan evaporated, however, as
soon as Amaranta Úrsula reiterated her decision not to move from Macondo even if she lost a
husband. During the first days Aureliano shared the general opinion that Gaston was a fool on a
velocipede, and that brought on a vague feeling of pity. Later, when he obtained deeper information
on the nature of men in the brothels, he thought that Gaston’s meekness had its origins in unbridled
passion. But when he came to know him better and realized his true character was the opposite of
his submissive conduct, he conceived the malicious suspicion that even the wait for the airplane was
an act. Then he thought that Gaston was not as foolish as he appeared, but, quite the contrary, was a
man of infinite steadiness, ability, and patience who had set about to conquer his wife with the
weariness of eternal agreement, of never saying no, of simulating a limitless conformity, letting her
become enmeshed in her own web until the day she could no longer bear the tedium of the illusions
close at hand and would pack the bags herself to go back to Europe. Aureliano’s former pity turned
into a violent dislike. Gaston’s system seemed so perverse to him, but at the same time so effective,
that he ventured to warn Amaranta Úrsula. She made fun of his suspicions, however, without even
noticing the heavy weight of love, uncertainty, and jealousy that he had inside. It had not occurred to
her that she was arousing something more than fraternal affection in Aureliano until she pricked her
finger trying to open a can of peaches and he dashed over to suck the blood out with an avidity and
a devotion that sent a chill up her spine.

“Aureliano!” She laughed, disturbed. “You’re too suspicious to be a good bat.”

Then Aureliano went all out. Giving her some small, orphaned kisses in the hollow of her
wounded hand, he opened up the most hidden passageways of his heart and drew out an
interminable and lacerated intestine, the terrible parasitic animal that had incubated in his mar-
tyrdom. He told her how he would get up at midnight to weep in loneliness and rage over the
underwear that she had left to dry in the bathroom. He told her about the anxiety with which he had
asked Nigromanta to howl like a cat and sob gaston gaston gaston in his ear, and with how much
astuteness he had ransacked her vials of perfume so that he could smell it on the necks of the little
girls who went to bed because of hunger. Frightened by the passion of that outburst, Amaranta
Úrsula was closing her fingers, contracting them like a shellfish until her wounded hand, free of all
pain and any vestige of pity, was converted into a knot of emeralds and topazes and stony and
unfeeling bones.

“Fool!” she said as if she were spitting. “I’m sailing on the first ship leaving for Belgium.”

Álvaro had come to the wise Catalonian’s bookstore one of those afternoons proclaiming at the
top of his lungs his latest discovery: a zoological brothel. It was called The Golden Child and it was
a huge open air salon through which no less than two hundred bitterns who told the time with a
deafening cackling strolled at will. In wire pens that surrounded the dance floor and among large


Amazonian camellias there were herons of different colors, crocodiles as fat as pigs, snakes with
twelve rattles, and a turtle with a gilded shell who dove in a small artificial ocean. There was a big
white dog, meek and a pederast, who would give stud services nevertheless in order to be fed. The
atmosphere had an innocent denseness, as if it had just been created, and the beautiful mulatto girls
who waited hopelessly among the blood-red petals and the outmoded phonograph records knew
ways of love that man had left behind forgotten in the earthly paradise. The first night that the
group visited that greenhouse of illusions the splendid and taciturn old woman who guarded the
entrance in a wicker rocking chair felt that time was turning back to its earliest origins when among
the five who were arriving she saw a bony, jaundiced man with Tartar cheekbones, marked forever
and from the beginning of the world with the pox of solitude.

“Lord, Lord,” she sighed, “Aureliano!”

She was seeing Colonel Aureliano Buendía once more as she had seen him in the light of a lamp
long before the wars, long before the desolation of glory and the exile of disillusionment, that
remote dawn when he went to her bedroom to give the first command of his life: the command to
give him love. It was Pilar Ternera. Years before, when she had reached one hundred forty-five years
of age, she had given up the pernicious custom of keeping track of her age and she went on living in
the static and marginal time of memories, in a future perfectly revealed and established, beyond the
futures disturbed by the insidious snares and suppositions of her cards.

From that night on Aureliano, took refuge in the compassionate tenderness and understanding of
his unknown great-great-grandmother. Sitting in her wicker rocking chair, she would recall the past,
reconstruct the grandeur and misfortunes of the family and the splendor of Macondo, which was
now erased, while Álvaro frightened the crocodiles with his noisy laughter and Alfonso invented
outlandish stories about the bitterns who had pecked out the eyes of four customers who
misbehaved the week before, and Gabriel was in the room of the pensive mulatto girl who did not
collect in money but in letters to a smuggler boyfriend who was in prison on the other side of the
Orinoco because the border guards had caught him and had made him sit on a chamberpot that
filled up with a mixture of shit and diamonds. That true brothel, with that maternal proprietress, was
the world of which Aureliano had dreamed during his prolonged captivity. He felt so well, so close
to perfect companionship, that he thought of no other refuge on the afternoon on which Amaranta
Úrsula had made his illusions crumble. He was ready to unburden himself with words so that
someone could break the knots that bound his chest, but he only managed to let out a fluid, warm,
and restorative weeping in Pilar Ternera’s lap. She let him finish, scratching his head with the tips of
her fingers, and without his having revealed that he was weeping from love, she recognized
immediately the oldest sobs in the history of man.

“It’s all right, child,” she consoled him. “Now tell me who it is.”

When Aureliano told her, Pilar Ternera let out a deep laugh, the old expansive laugh that ended
up as a cooing of doves. There was no mystery in the heart of a Buendía that was impenetrable for
her because a century of cards and experience had taught her that the history of the family was a
machine with unavoidable repetitions, a turning wheel that would have gone on spilling into eternity
were it not for the progressive and irremediable wearing of the axle.

“Don’t worry,” she said, smiling. “Wherever she is right now, she’s waiting for you.”

It was half past four in the afternoon when Amaranta Úrsula came out of her bath. Aureliano
saw her go by his room with a robe of soft folds and a towel wrapped around her head like a turban.
He followed her almost on tiptoes, stumbling from drunkenness, and he went into the nuptial
bedroom just as she opened the robe and closed it again in fright. He made a silent signal toward the
next room where the door was half open and where Aureliano knew that Gaston was beginning to
write a letter.

“Go away,” she said voicelessly.


Aureliano, smiled, picked her up by the waist with both hands like a pot of begonias, and
dropped her on her back on the bed. With a brutal tug he pulled off her bathrobe before she had
time to resist and he loomed over an abyss of newly washed nudity whose skin color, lines of fuzz,
and hidden moles had all been imagined in the shadows of the other rooms. Amaranta Úrsula
defended herself sincerely with the astuteness of a wise woman, weaseling her slippery, flexible, and
fragrant weasel’s body as she tried to knee him in the kidneys and scorpion his face with her nails,
but without either of them giving a gasp that might not have been taken for that breathing of a
person watching the meager April sunset through the open window. It was a fierce fight, a battle to
the death, but it seemed to be without violence because it consisted of distorted attacks and ghostly
evasions, slow, cautious, solemn, so that during it all there was time for the petunias to bloom and
for Gaston to forget about his aviator’s dream in the next room, as if they were two enemy lovers
seeking reconciliation at the bottom of an aquarium. In the heat of that savage and ceremonious
struggle, Amaranta Úrsula understood that her meticulous silence was so irrational that it could
awaken the suspicions of her nearby husband much more than the sound of warfare that they were
trying to avoid. Then she began to laugh with her lips tight together, without giving up the fight, but
defending herself with false bites and deweaseling her body little by little until they both were
conscious of being adversaries and accomplices at the same time and the affray degenerated into a
conventional gambol and the attacks became caresses. Suddenly, almost playfully, like one more bit
of mischief, Amaranta Úrsula dropped her defense, and when she tried to recover, frightened by
what she herself had made possible, it was too late. A great commotion immobilized her in her
center of gravity, planted her in her place, and her defensive will was demolished by the irresistible
anxiety to discover what the orange whistles and the invisible globes on the other side of death were
like. She barely had time to reach out her hand and grope for the towel to put a gag between her
teeth so that she would not let out the cat howls that were already tearing at her insides.


Chapter 20

PILAR TERNERA died in her wicker rocking chair during one night of festivities as she watched over
the entrance to her paradise. In accordance with her last wishes she was not buried in a coffin but
sitting in her rocker, which eight men lowered by ropes into a huge hole dug in the center of the
dance floor. The mulatto girls, dressed in black, pale from weeping, invented shadowy rites as they
took off their earrings, brooches, and rings and threw them into the pit before it was closed over
with a slab that bore neither name nor dates, and that was covered with a pile of Amazonian
camellias. After poisoning the animals they closed up the doors and windows with brick and mortar
and they scattered out into the world with their wooden trunks that were lined with pictures of
saints, prints from magazines, and the portraits of sometime sweethearts, remote and fantastic, who
shat diamonds, or ate cannibals, or were crowned playing-card kings on the high seas.

It was the end. In Pilar Ternera’s tomb, among the psalm and cheap whore jewelry, the ruins of
the past would rot, the little that remained after the wise Catalonian had auctioned off his bookstore
and returned to the Mediterranean village where he had been born, overcome by a yearning for a
lasting springtime. No one could have foreseen his decision. He had arrived in Macondo during the
splendor of the banana company, fleeing from one of many wars, and nothing more practical had
occurred to him than to set up that bookshop of incunabula and first editions in several languages,
which casual customers would thumb through cautiously, as if they were junk books, as they waited
their turn to have their dreams interpreted in the house across the way. He spent half his life in the
back of the store, scribbling in his extra-careful hand in purple ink and on pages that he tore out of
school notebooks, and no one was sure exactly what he was writing. When Aureliano first met him
he had two boxes of those motley pages that in some way made one think of Melquíades’
parchments, and from that time until he left he had filled a third one, so it was reasonable to believe
that he had done nothing else during his stay in Macondo. The only people with whom he
maintained relations were the four friends, whom he had exchanged their tops and kites for books,
and he set them to reading Seneca and Ovid while they were still in grammar school. He treated the
classical writers with a household familiarity, as if they had all been his roommates at some period,
and he knew many things that should not have been known, such as the fact that Saint Augustine
wore a wool jacket under his habit that he did not take off for fourteen years and that Arnaldo of
Villanova, the necromancer, was impotent since childhood because of a scorpion bite. His fervor for
the written word was an interweaving of solemn respect and gossipy irreverence. Not even his own
manuscripts were safe from that dualism. Having learned Catalan in order to translate them, Alfonso
put a roll of pages in his pockets, which were always full of newspaper clippings and manuals for
strange trades, and one night he lost them in the house of the little girls who went to bed because of
hunger. When the wise old grandfather found out, instead of raising a row as had been feared, he
commented, dying with laughter, that it was the natural destiny of literature. On the other hand,
there was no human power capable of persuading him not to take along the three boxes when he
returned to his native village, and he unleashed a string of Carthaginian curses at the railroad
inspectors who tried to ship them as freight until he finally succeeded in keeping them with him in
the passenger coach. “The world must be all fucked up,” he said then, “when men travel first class
and literature goes as freight.” That was the last thing he was heard to say. He had spent a dark week
on the final preparations for the trip, because as the hour approached his humor was breaking down
and things began to be misplaced, and what he put in one place would appear in another, attacked
by the same elves that had tormented Fernanda.

“Collons,” he would curse. “I shit on Canon Twenty-seven of the Synod of London.”


Germán and Aureliano took care of him. They helped him like a child, fastening his tickets and
immigration documents to his pockets with safety pins, making him a detailed list of what he must
do from the time he left Macondo until he landed in Barcelona, but nonetheless he threw away a
pair of pants with half of his money in it without realizing it. The night before the trip, after nailing
up the boxes and putting his clothing into the same suitcase that he had brought when he first came,
he narrowed his clam eyes, pointed with a kind of impudent benediction at the stacks of books with
which he had endured during his exile, and said to his friends:

“All that shit there I leave to you people!”

Three months later they received in a large envelope twenty-nine letters and more than fifty
pictures that he had accumulated during the leisure of the high seas. Although he did not date them,
the order in which he had written the letters was obvious. In the first ones, with his customary good
humor, he spoke about the difficulties of the crossing, the urge he had to throw the cargo officer
overboard when he would not let him keep the three boxes in his cabin, the clear imbecility of a lady
who was terrified at the number thirteen, not out of superstition but because she thought it was a
number that had no end, and the bet that he had won during the first dinner because he had
recognized in the drinking water on board the taste of the nighttime beets by the springs of Lérida.
With the passage of the days, however, the reality of life on board mattered less and less to him and
even the most recent and trivial happenings seemed worthy of nostalgia, because as the ship got
farther away, his memory began to grow sad. That process of nostalgia was also evident in the
pictures. In the first ones he looked happy, with his sport shirt which looked like a hospital jacket
and his snowy mane, in an October Caribbean filled with whitecaps. In the last ones he could be
seen to be wearing a dark coat and a milk scarf, pale in the face, taciturn from absence on the deck
of a mournful ship that had come to be like a sleepwalker on the autumnal seas. Germán and Aureli-
ano answered his letters. He wrote so many during the first months that at that time they felt closer
to him than when he had been in Macondo, and they were almost freed from the rancor that he had
left behind. At first he told them that everything was just the same, that the pink snails were still in
the house where he had been born, that the dry herring still had the same taste on a piece of toast,
that the waterfalls in the village still took on a perfumed smell at dusk. They were the notebook
pages again, woven with the purple scribbling, in which he dedicated a special paragraph to each
one. Nevertheless, and although he himself did not seem to notice it, those letters of recuperation
and stimulation were slowly changing into pastoral letters of disenchantment. One winter night
while the soup was boiling in the fireplace, he missed the heat of the back of his store, the buzzing
of the sun on the dusty almond trees, the whistle of the train during the lethargy of siesta time, just
as in Macondo he had missed the winter soup in the fireplace, the cries of the coffee vendor, and the
fleeting larks of springtime. Upset by two nostalgias facing each other like two mirrors, he lost his
marvelous sense of unreality and he ended up recommending to all of them that they leave
Macondo, that they forget everything he had taught them about the world and the human heart, that
they shit on Horace, and that wherever they might be they always remember that the past was a lie,
that memory has no return, that every spring gone by could never be recovered, and that the wildest
and most tenacious love was an ephemeral truth in the end.

Álvaro was the first to take the advice to abandon Macondo. He sold everything, even the tame
jaguar that teased passersby from the courtyard of his house, and he bought an eternal ticket on a
train that never stopped traveling. In the postcards that he sent from the way stations he would
describe with shouts the instantaneous images that he had seen from the window of his coach, and it
was as if he were tearing up and throwing into oblivion some long, evanescent poem: the chimerical
Negroes in the cotton fields of Louisiana, the winged horses in the bluegrass of Kentucky, the
Greek lovers in the infernal sunsets of Arizona, the girl in the red sweater painting watercolors by a
lake in Michigan who waved at him with her brushes, not to say farewell but out of hope, because


she did not know that she was watching a train with no return passing by. Then Alfonso and
Germán left one Saturday with the idea of coming back on Monday, but nothing more was ever
heard of them. A year after the departure of the wise Catalonian the only one left in Macondo was
Gabriel, still adrift at the mercy of Nigromanta’s chancy charity and answering the questions of a
contest in a French magazine in which the first prize was a trip to Paris. Aureliano, who was the one
who subscribed to it, helped him fill in the answers, sometimes in his house but most of the time
among the ceramic bottles and atmosphere of valerian in the only pharmacy left in Macondo, where
Mercedes, Gabriel’s stealthy girl friend, lived. It was the last that remained of a past whose
annihilation had not taken place because it was still in a process of annihilation, consuming itself
from within, ending at every moment but never ending its ending. The town had reached such
extremes of inactivity that when Gabriel won the contest and left for Paris with two changes of
clothing, a pair of shoes, and the complete works of Rabelais, he had to signal the engineer to stop
the train and pick him up. The old Street of the Turks was at that time an abandoned corner where
the last Arabs were letting themselves be dragged off to death with the age-old custom of sitting in
their doorways, although it had been many years since they had sold the last yard of diagonal cloth,
and in the shadowy showcases only the decapitated manikins remained. The banana company’s city,
which Patricia Brown may have tried to evoke for her grandchildren during the nights of intolerance
and dill pickles in Prattville, Alabama, was a plain of wild grass. The ancient priest who had taken
Father Angel’s place and whose name no one had bothered to find out awaited God’s mercy
stretched out casually in a hammock, tortured by arthritis and the insomnia of doubt while the
lizards and rats fought over the inheritance of the nearby church. In that Macondo forgotten even
by the birds, where the dust and the heat had become so strong that it was difficult to breathe,
secluded by solitude and love and by the solitude of love in a house where it was almost impossible
to sleep because of the noise of the red ants, Aureliano, and Amaranta Úrsula were the only happy
beings, and the most happy on the face of the earth.

Gaston had returned to Brussels. Tired of waiting for the airplane, one day he put his
indispensable things into a small suitcase, took his file of correspondence, and left with the idea of
returning by air before his concession was turned over to a group of German pilots who had
presented the provincial authorities with a more ambitious project than his. Since the afternoon of
their first love, Aureliano and Amaranta Úrsula had continued taking advantage of her husband’s
rare unguarded moments, making love with gagged ardor in chance meetings and almost always
interrupted by unexpected returns. But when they saw themselves alone in the house they
succumbed to the delirium of lovers who were making up for lost time. It was a mad passion,
unhinging, which made Fernanda’s bones tremble with horror in her grave and which kept them in a
state of perpetual excitement. Amaranta Úrsula’s shrieks, her songs of agony would break out the
same at two in the afternoon on the dining-room table as at two in the morning in the pantry. “What
hurts me most,” she would say, laughing, “is all the time that we wasted.” In the bewilderment of
passion she watched the ants devastating the garden, sating their prehistoric hunger with the beam
of the house, and she watched the torrents of living lava take over the porch again, but she bothered
to fight them only when she found them in her bedroom. Aureliano abandoned the parchments, did
not leave the house again, and carelessly answered the letters from the wise Catalonian. They lost
their sense of reality, the notion of time, the rhythm of daily habits. They closed the doors and
windows again so as not to waste time getting undressed and they walked about the house as
Remedios the Beauty had wanted to do and they would roll around naked in the mud of the
courtyard, and one afternoon they almost drowned as they made love in the cistern. In a short time
they did more damage than the red ants: they destroyed the furniture in the parlor, in their madness
they tore to shreds the hammock that had resisted the sad bivouac loves of Colonel Aureliano
Buendía and they disemboweled the mattresses and emptied them on the floor as they suffocated in


storms of cotton. Although Aureliano was just as ferocious a lover as his rival, it was Amaranta
Úrsula who ruled in that paradise of disaster with her mad genius and her lyrical voracity, as if she
had concentrated in her love the unconquerable energy that her great-great-grandmother had given
to the making of little candy animals. And yet, while she was singing with pleasure and dying with
laughter over her own inventions, Aureliano was becoming more and more absorbed and silent, for
his passion was self-centered and burning. Nevertheless, they both reached such extremes of
virtuosity that when they became exhausted from excitement, they would take advantage of their
fatigue. They would give themselves over to the worship of their bodies, discovering that the rest
periods of love had unexplored possibilities, much richer than those of desire. While he would rub
Amaranta Úrsula’s erect breasts with egg whites or smooth her elastic thighs and peach-like stomach
with cocoa butter, she would play with Aureliano’s portentous creature as if it were a doll and would
paint clown’s eyes on it with her lipstick and give it a Turk’s mustache with her eyebrow pencil, and
would put on organza bow ties and little tinfoil hats. One night they daubed themselves from head
to toe with peach jam and licked each other like dogs and made mad love on the floor of the porch,
and they were awakened by a torrent of carnivorous ants who were ready to eat them alive.

During the pauses in their delirium, Amaranta Úrsula would answer Gaston’s letters. She felt him
to be so far away and busy that his return seemed impossible to her. In one of his first letters he told
her that his Partners had actually sent the airplane, but that a shipping agent in Brussels had sent it
by mistake to Tanganyika, where it was delivered to the scattered tribe of the Makondos. That mix-
up brought on so many difficulties that just to get the plane back might take two years. So Amaranta
Úrsula dismissed the possibility of an inopportune return. Aureliano, for his part, had no other
contact with the world except for the letters from the wise Catalonian and the news he had of
Gabriel through Mercedes, the silent pharmacist. At first they were real contacts. Gabriel had turned
in his return ticket in order to stay in Paris, selling the old newspapers and empty bottles that the
chambermaids threw out of a gloomy hotel on the Rue Dauphine. Aureliano could visualize him
then in a turtleneck sweater which he took off only when the sidewalk Cafés on Montparnasse filled
with springtime lovers, and sleeping by day and writing by night in order to confuse hunger in the
room that smelled of boiled cauliflower where Rocamadour was to die. Nevertheless, news about
him was slowly becoming so uncertain, and the letters from the wise man so sporadic and
melancholy, that Aureliano grew to think about them as Amaranta Úrsula thought about her
husband, and both of them remained floating in an empty universe where the only everyday and
eternal reality was love.

Suddenly, like the stampede in that world of happy unawareness, came the news of Gaston’s
return. Aureliano and Amaranta Úrsula opened their eyes, dug deep into their souls, looked at the
letter with their hands on their hearts, and understood that they were so close to each other that they
preferred death to separation. Then she wrote her husband a letter of contradictory truths in which
she repeated her love and said how anxious she was to see him again, but at the same time she
admitted as a design of fate the impossibility of living without Aureliano. Contrary to what they had
expected, Gaston sent them a calm, almost paternal reply, with two whole pages devoted to a
warning against the fickleness of passion and a final paragraph with unmistakable wishes for them to
be as happy as he had been during his brief conjugal experience. It was such an unforeseen attitude
that Amaranta Úrsula felt humiliated by the idea that she had given her husband the pretext that he
had wanted in order to abandon her to her fate. The rancor was aggravated six months later when
Gaston wrote again from Léopoldville, where he had finally recovered the airplane, simply to ask
them to ship him the velocipede, which of all that he had left behind in Macondo was the only thing
that had any sentimental value for him. Aureliano bore Amaranta Úrsula’s spite patiently and made
an effort to show her that he could be as good a husband in adversity as in prosperity, and the daily
needs that besieged them when Gaston’s last money ran out created a bond of solidarity between


them that was not as dazzling and heady as passion, but that let them make love as much and be as
happy as during their uproarious and salacious days. At the time Pilar Ternera died they were
expecting a child.

In the lethargy of her pregnancy, Amaranta Úrsula tried to set up a business in necklaces made
out of the backbones of fish. But except for Mercedes, who bought a dozen, she could not find any
customers. Aureliano was aware for the first time that his gift for languages, his encyclopedic
knowledge, his rare faculty for remembering the details of remote deeds and places without having
been there, were as useless as the box of genuine jewelry that his wife owned, which must have been
worth as much as all the money that the last inhabitants of Macondo could have put together. They
survived miraculously. Although Amaranta Úrsula did not lose her good humor or her genius for
erotic mischief, she acquired the habit of sitting on the porch after lunch in a kind of wakeful and
thoughtful siesta. Aureliano would accompany her. Sometimes they would remain there in silence
until nightfall, opposite each other, looking into each other’s eyes, loving each other as much as in
their scandalous days. The uncertainty of the future made them turn their hearts toward the past.
They saw themselves in the lost paradise of the deluge, splashing in the puddles in the courtyard,
killing lizards to hang on Úrsula, pretending that they were going to bury her alive, and those
memories revealed to them the truth that they had been happy together ever since they had had
memory. Going deeper into the past, Amaranta Úrsula remembered the afternoon on which she had
gone into the silver shop and her mother told her that little Aureliano was nobody’s child because he
had been found floating in a basket. Although the version seemed unlikely to them, they did not
have any information enabling them to replace it with the true one. All that they were sure of after
examining an the possibilities was that Fernanda was not Aureliano’s mother. Amaranta Úrsula was
inclined to believe that he was the son of Petra Cotes, of whom she remembered only tales of
infamy, and that supposition produced a twinge of horror in her heart.

Tormented by the certainty that he was his wife’s brother, Aureliano ran out to the parish house
to search through the moldy and moth-eaten archives for some clue to his parentage. The oldest
baptismal certificate that he found was that of Amaranta Buendía, baptized in adolescence by Father
Nicanor Reyna during the time when he was trying to prove the existence of God by means of tricks
with chocolate. He began to have that feeling that he was one of the seventeen Aurelianos, whose
birth certificates he tracked down as he went through four volumes, but the baptism dates were too
far back for his age. Seeing him lost in the labyrinths of kinship, trembling with uncertainty, the arth-
ritic priest, who was watching him from his hammock, asked him compassionately what his name
was.

“Aureliano Buendía,” he said.

“Then don’t wear yourself out searching,” the priest exclaimed with final conviction. “Many years
ago there used to be a street here with that name and in those days people had the custom of
naming their children after streets.”

Aureliano trembled with rage.

“So!” he said. “You don’t believe it either.”

“Believe what?”

“That Colonel Aureliano, Buendía fought thirty-two civil wars and lost them all,” Aureliano
answered. “That the army hemmed in and machine-gunned three thousand workers and that their
bodies were carried off to be thrown into the sea on a train with two hundred cars.”

The priest measured him with a pitying look.

“Oh, my son,” he signed. “It’s enough for me to be sure that you and I exist at this moment.”

So Aureliano and Amaranta Úrsula accepted the version of the basket, not because they believed
it, but because it spared them their terror. As the pregnancy advanced they were becoming a single
being, they were becoming more and more integrated in the solitude of a house that needed only


one last breath to be knocked down. They restricted themselves to an essential area, from
Fernanda’s bedroom, where the charms of sedentary love were visible, to the beginning of the
porch, where Amaranta Úrsula would sit to sew bootees and bonnets for the newborn baby and
Aureliano, would answer the occasional letters from the wise Catalonian. The rest of the house was
given over to the tenacious assault of destruction. The silver shop, Melquíades’ room, the primitive
and silent realm of Santa Sofía de la Piedad remained in the depths of a domestic jungle that no one
would have had the courage to penetrate. Surrounded by the voracity of nature, Aureliano and
Amaranta Úrsula continued cultivating the oregano and the begonias and defended their world with
demarcations of quicklime, building the last trenches in the age-old war between man and ant. Her
long and neglected hair, the splotches that were beginning to appear on her face, the swelling of her
legs, the deformation of her former lovemaking weasel’s body had changed Amaranta Úrsula from
the youthful creature she had been when she arrived at the house with the cage of luckless canaries
and her captive husband, but it did not change the vivacity of her spirit. “Shit,” she would say,
laughingly. “Who would have thought that we really would end up living like cannibals!” The last
thread that joined them to the world was broken on the sixth month of pregnancy when they
received a letter that obviously was not from the wise Catalonian. It had been mailed in Barcelona,
but the envelope was addressed in conventional blue ink by an official hand and it had the innocent
and impersonal look of hostile messages. Aureliano snatched it out of Amaranta Úrsula’s hands as
she was about to open it.

“Not this one,” he told her. “I don’t want to know what it says.”

Just as he had sensed, the wise Catalonian did not write again. The stranger’s letter, which no one
read, was left to the mercy of the moths on the shelf where Fernanda had forgotten her wedding
ring on occasion and there it remained, consuming itself in the inner fire of its bad news as the
solitary lovers sailed against the tide of those days of the last stages, those impenitent and ill-fated
times which were squandered on the useless effort of making them drift toward the desert of
disenchantment and oblivion. Aware of that menace, Aureliano and Amaranta Úrsula spent the hot
months holding hands, ending with the love of loyalty for the child who had his beginning in the
madness of fornication. At night, holding each other in bed, they were not frightened by the
sublunary explosions of the ants or the noise of the moths or the constant and clean whistle of the
growth of the weeds in the neighboring rooms. Many times they were awakened by the traffic of the
dead. They could hear Úrsula fighting against the laws of creation to maintain the line, and José
Arcadio Buendía searching for the mythical truth of the great inventions, and Fernanda praying, and
Colonel Aureliano Buendía stupefying himself with the deception of war and the little gold fishes,
and Aureliano Segundo dying of solitude in the turmoil of his debauches, and then they learned that
dominant obsessions can prevail against death and they were happy again with the certainty that they
would go on loving each other in their shape as apparitions long after other species of future animals
would steal from the insects the paradise of misery that the insects were finally stealing from man.

One Sunday, at six in the afternoon, Amaranta Úrsula felt the pangs of childbirth. The smiling
mistress of the little girls who went to bed because of hunger had her get onto the dining-room
table, straddled her stomach, and mistreated her with wild gallops until her cries were drowned out
by the bellows of a formidable male child. Through her tears Amaranta Úrsula could see that he was
one of those great Buendías, strong and willful like the José Arcadios, with the open and clairvoyant
eyes of the Aurelianos, and predisposed to begin the race again from the beginning and cleanse it of
its pernicious vices and solitary calling, for he was the only one in a century who had been
engendered with love.

“He’s a real cannibal.” she said. “We’ll name him Rodrigo.”

“No,” her husband countered. “We’ll name him Aureliano and he’ll win thirty-two wars.”


After cutting the umbilical cord, the midwife began to use a cloth to take off the blue grease that
covered his body as Aureliano held up a lamp. Only when they turned him on his stomach did they
see that he had something more than other men, and they leaned over to examine him. It was the
tail of a pig.

They were not alarmed. Aureliano and Amaranta Úrsula were not aware of the family precedent,
nor did they remember Úrsula’s frightening admonitions, and the midwife pacified them with the
idea that the tail could be cut off when the child got his second teeth. Then they had no time to
think about it again, because Amaranta Úrsula was bleeding in an uncontainable torrent. They tried
to help her with applications of spider webs and balls of ash, but it was like trying to hold back a
spring with one’s hands. During the first hours she tried to maintain her good humor. She took the
frightened Aureliano by the hand and begged him not to worry, because people like her were not
made to die against their will, and she exploded with laughter at the ferocious remedies of the
midwife. But as Aureliano’s hope abandoned him she was becoming less visible, as if the light on her
were fading away, until she sank into drowsiness. At dawn on Monday they brought a woman who
recited cauterizing prayers that were infallible for man and beast beside her bed, but Amaranta
Úrsula’s passionate blood was insensible to any artifice that did not come from love. In the after-
noon, after twenty-four hours of desperation, they knew that she was dead because the flow had
stopped without remedies and her profile became sharp and the blotches on her face evaporated in a
halo of alabaster and she smiled again.

Aureliano did not understand until then how much he loved his friends, how much he missed
them, and how much he would have given to be with them at that moment. He put the child in the
basket that his mother had prepared for him, covered the face of the corpse with a blanket, and
wandered aimlessly through the town, searching for an entrance that went back to the past. He
knocked at the door of the pharmacy, where he had not visited lately, and he found a carpenter
shop. The old woman who opened the door with a lamp in her hand took pity on his delirium and
insisted that, no, there had never been a pharmacy there, nor had she ever known a woman with a
thin neck and sleepy eyes named Mercedes. He wept, leaning his brow against the door of the wise
Catalonian’s former bookstore, conscious that he was paying with his tardy sobs for a death that he
had refused to weep for on time so as not to break the spell of love. He smashed his fists against the
cement wall of The Golden Child, calling for Pilar Ternera, indifferent to the luminous orange disks
that were crossing the sky and that so many times on holiday nights he had contemplated with
childish fascination from the courtyard of the curlews. In the last open salon of the tumbledown
red-light district an accordion group was playing the songs of Rafael Escalona, the bishop’s nephew,
heir to the secrets of Francisco the Man. The bartender, who had a withered and somewhat
crumpled arm because he had raised it against his mother, invited Aureliano to have a bottle of cane
liquor, and Aureliano then bought him one. The bartender spoke to him about the misfortune of his
arm. Aureliano spoke to him about the misfortune of his heart, withered and somewhat crumpled
for having been raised against his sister. They ended up weeping together and Aureliano felt for a
moment that the pain was over. But when he was alone again in the last dawn of Macondo, he
opened up his arms in the middle of the square, ready to wake up the whole world, and he shouted
with all his might:

“Friends are a bunch of bastards!”

Nigromanta rescued him from a pool of vomit and tears. She took him to her room, cleaned him
up, made him drink a cup of broth. Thinking that it would console him, she took a piece of charcoal
and erased the innumerable loves that he still owed her for, and she voluntarily brought up her own
most solitary sadnesses so as not to leave him alone in his weeping. When he awoke, after a dull and
brief sleep, Aureliano recovered the awareness of his headache. He opened his eyes and remembered
the child.


He could not find the basket. At first he felt an outburst of joy, thinking that Amaranta Úrsula
had awakened from death to take care of the child. But her corpse was a pile of stones under the
blanket. Aware that when he arrived he had found the -door to the bedroom open, Aureliano went
across the porch which was saturated with the morning sighs of oregano and looked into the dining
room, where the remnants of the birth still lay: the large pot, the bloody sheets, the jars of ashes, and
the twisted umbilical cord of the child on an opened diaper on the table next to the shears and the
fishline. The idea that the midwife had returned for the child during the night gave him a pause of
rest in which to think. He sank into the rocking chair, the same one in which Rebeca had sat during
the early days of the house to give embroidery lessons, and in which Amaranta had played Chinese
checkers with Colonel Gerineldo Márquez, and in which Amaranta Úrsula had sewn the tiny
clothing for the child, and in that flash of lucidity he became aware that he was unable to bear in his
soul the crushing weight of so much past. Wounded by the fatal lances of his own nostalgia and that
of others, he admired the persistence of the spider webs on the dead rose bushes, the perseverance
of the rye grass, the patience of the air in the radiant February dawn. And then he saw the child. It
was a dry and bloated bag of skin that all the ants in the world were dragging toward their holes
along the stone path in the garden. Aureliano could not move. Not because he was paralyzed by
horror but because at that prodigious instant Melquíades’ final keys were revealed to him and he saw
the epigraph of the parchments perfectly placed in the order of man’s time and space: The first of the
line is tied to a tree and the last is being eaten by the ants.

Aureliano, had never been more lucid in any act of his life as when he forgot about his dead ones
and the pain of his dead ones and nailed up the doors and windows again with Fernanda’s crossed
boards so as not to be disturbed by any temptations of the world, for he knew then that his fate was
written in Melquíades’ parchments. He found them intact among the prehistoric plants and steaming
puddles and luminous insects that had removed all trace of man’s passage on earth from the room,
and he did not have the calmness to bring them out into the light, but right there, standing, without
the slightest difficulty, as if they had been written in Spanish and were being read under the dazzling
splendor of high noon, he began to decipher them aloud. It was the history of the family, written by
Melquíades, down to the most trivial details, one hundred years ahead of time. He had written it in
Sanskrit, which was his mother tongue, and he had encoded the even lines in the private cipher of
the Emperor Augustus and the odd ones in a Lacedemonian military code. The final protection,
which Aureliano had begun to glimpse when he let himself be confused by the love of Amaranta
Úrsula, was based on the fact that Melquíades had not put events in the order of man’s conventional
time, but had concentrated a century of daily episodes in such a way that they coexisted in one
instant. Fascinated by the discovery, Aureliano, read aloud without skipping the chanted encyclicals
that Melquíades himself had made Arcadio listen to and that were in reality the prediction of his
execution, and he found the announcement of the birth of the most beautiful woman in the world
who was rising up to heaven in body and soul, and he found the origin of the posthumous twins
who gave up deciphering the parchments, not simply through incapacity and lack of drive, but also
because their attempts were premature. At that point, impatient to know his own origin, Aureliano
skipped ahead. Then the wind began, warm, incipient, full of voices from the past, the murmurs of
ancient geraniums, sighs of disenchantment that preceded the most tenacious nostalgia. He did not
notice it because at that moment he was discovering the first indications of his own being in a
lascivious grandfather who let himself be frivolously dragged along across a hallucinated plateau in
search of a beautiful woman who would not make him happy. Aureliano recognized him, he pursued
the hidden paths of his descent, and he found the instant of his own conception among the
scorpions and the yellow butterflies in a sunset bathroom where a mechanic satisfied his lust on a
woman who was giving herself out of rebellion. He was so absorbed that he did not feel the second
surge of wind either as its cyclonic strength tore the doors and windows off their hinges, pulled off


the roof of the east wing, and uprooted the foundations. Only then did he discover that Amaranta
Úrsula was not his sister but his aunt, and that Sir Francis Drake had attacked Riohacha only so that
they could seek each other through the most intricate labyrinths of blood until they would engender
the mythological animal that was to bring the line to an end. Macondo was already a fearful
whirlwind of dust and rubble being spun about by the wrath of the biblical hurricane when
Aureliano skipped eleven pages so as not to lose time with facts he knew only too well, and he
began to decipher the instant that he was living, deciphering it as he lived it, prophesying himself in
the act of deciphering the last page of the parchments, as if he were looking into a speaking mirror.
Then he skipped again to anticipate the predictions and ascertain the date and circumstances of his
death. Before reaching the final line, however, he had already understood that he would never leave
that room, for it was foreseen that the city of mirrors (or mirages) would be wiped out by the wind
and exiled from the memory of men at the precise moment when Aureliano Babilonia would finish
deciphering the parchments, and that everything written on them was unrepeatable since time
immemorial and forever more, because races condemned to one hundred years of solitude did not
have a second opportunity on earth.





THE END.


